The introduction to Anahid Kassabian’s Ubiquitous Listening: Affect, Attention, and Distributed Subjectivity explores the titular subject to great depths. More specifically, she explores the idea that listening to ubiquitous musics, whether they are given or denied attention, influences some affective response in the human mind and body that functions to close the gaps in a “non-individual, not simply human, distributed subjectivity” (Kassabian 1). The introduction to Pauline Oliveros’s Deep Listening: A Composer’s Sound Practice presents a meditative practice of fully attentive listening as a means of expanding the potential for aural perception “to the whole of the space/time continuum of perceptible sound” (Oliveros 1). Quite obviously from their titles, these texts evaluate similar yet in many ways contradictory subjects. It should be noted that since Oliveros is describing a practice while Kassabian describes a previously unexplored realm of academia, their many points of consensus and discord should not be seen as an evaluation of two conflicting approaches to listening, rather their similarities and differences enlighten how each text defines humanity’s relationship to sounds and musics. Structurally, both Oliveros and Kassabian employ definitions as a means to develop their subjects though they differ in their choice of sources and in the tones they create. Outside of their rhetorical strategies, they differ in how they draw the line between listening and hearing and in the mode by which listening and hearing occurs. While Oliveros might describe sound as an art of attention, Kassabian would describe it as an art of erotics. Despite their differences, they find common ground in how sound expands the mind and in how sound impacts the listener. In this way, the texts in combination illustrate the value of aural arts, natural and man-made, in defining the human experience individually and at a societal scale.
Likely due to the fact that each work functions to introduce their respective subjects in their respective books, the two pieces share similar structures and rhetorical strategies with some key differences in their execution. Notably, each work is intended to introduce and define key terms and establish how those key terms relate to each other in their subjects. Kassabian, for instance, uses headers that describe the term to be defined or the relationship to be explored. One section bears the title “Affect,” the next “Senses,” and after each of those comes “Affect and Senses'' (Kassabian 2-4). Though terms and their relationships are defined in these sections, Kassabian uses them primarily to express the nuances of his thesis in this case he uses their relationship to present senses as “a not rigidly differentiated field” that is closely intertwined with emotional and haptic affects (Kassabian 6). Similarly, Oliveros divides her introduction into sections, but rather than using headers, she relies on rhetorical questions and bold faced sentences to establish structure. Each of her sections have a similar purpose to Kassabians in that they define a term, but more importantly, they add depth to the understanding of her subject. For example, there are two consecutive sections, each introduced by the question, “So what is consciousness?” (Oliveros 2). The first establishes a lower level conception of what consciousness is and how it works, the second describes consciousness in the context of a previous statement about listening so as to qualify and expand upon the necessary conditions for Deep Listening. Both of these sections function to develop a deeper understanding of the complexities of Deep Listening.
Moreover, both pieces lean on academia to support their conclusions though often through different means. Kassabian uses cultural sources and academia around music, film, and sound to provide some nuance to the intellectual topics he approaches, often drawing insight from them or countering their conclusions to support his own. In one case, Kassabian refers to Joseph Lanza’s Elevator Music to establish that “ubiquitous musics… are a quintessentially twentieth-century technology” (Kassabian 2). In another, he expands on Deleuze and Guattari’s conception of Striated and Smooth space to determine that haptics are “closely tied to erotics, to the dissolution of boundaries, to an erosion of self-other distinctions” (Kassabian 7). Oliveros, on the other hand, uses a range of scientific and cultural works to establish her definitions. One scientific source that described how “evoked potentials in the brain appear up to a half-second before the individual is aware of a stimulus” is used to further her point that since “perception in time is an illusion,” consciousness is the act of bringing the past to the present and therefore is inextricably linked with “self-recognition” (Oliveros 2).
Tonally Deep Listening and Ubiquitous Listening apply very different approaches as their intended audiences come from very different backgrounds. Throughout Ubiquitous Listening Kassabian uses an intensely academic tone. That is, his writing is heavily relational and almost esoteric. This is perhaps best exemplified by one of his sentences referring to the works of Deleuze and Guattari as they relate to that of Marks and Massumi where he states that “The shift away from narrative identification and position draws a renewed focus onto somatic, haptic engagements with music (and other arts)” (Kassabian 7). This sentence draws on several of his previously explored ideas and utilizes academic terms specific to his subject because his audience is assumed to be of an academic background. In contrast, Oliveros is writing to advocate for the public to accept and engage in the practice of Deep Listening in the hopes that they may attend one of her workshops and further their understanding of sound and listening. Therefore, much of her writing is more simple, direct, and concise.
Apart from their rhetoric, Kassabian and Oliveros find many points of conflict and disagreement in their content. Firstly, their most obvious point of contention is around the difference (or lack thereof) between listening and hearing. Fundamentally, their views are opposed on this front as both suggest that listening develops the conception of a self, but they disagree on what that self may consist of and what type of listening, attentive or otherwise, can serve this function. Kassabian establishes that listening consists of “a range of engagements between and across human bodies and music technologies” and therefore his definition “wipes out… the routine distinction between listening and hearing… in which the presumption is that hearing is physiological and listening is conscious and attentive” (Kassabian 11). Oliveros describes the difference between listening and hearing in just the way that Kassabian “wipes out” by stating that she differentiates “‘to hear’ and ‘to listen’. To hear is the physical means that enables perception. To listen is to give attention to what is perceived both acoustically and psychologically” (Oliveros 2). Kassabian determines that listening can imply any degree of attention while Oliveros draws a hard line between listening with attention and hearing without it. In drawing that line, she discards the value of hearing to “self-recognition” as hearing lacks the key feature of consciousness. Kassabian counter’s this point by establishing that “Identity is a position left behind by the work of affect” which is unrelated to the degree of consciousness.
As a result of their separate approaches to listening, deep versus ubiquitous, they find themselves again in opposition to each other with respect to the mode of listening. Kassabian again takes the more holistic stance by suggesting that listening is not dependent on the ear; it is rather dependent on the sum of a number of sensory experiences. That is, he thinks of hearing “as a not rigidly differentiated field” (Kassabian 6). This allows him to come to the conclusion that all things, hearing or deaf, are bound by ubiquitous listening in a distributed subjectivity. Oliveros, however, clearly states that “The ear makes it possible to hear and to listen” (Oliveros 2). Her point is made as a result of the fundamental difference between the purposes of Ubiquitous and Deep Listening. Since Deep Listening is intended to expand perception rather than expanding the self, it is dependent on the ability to perceive sound aurally. 
In spite of their differences, Kassabian and Oliveros both determine that their respective ways of hearing expand the mind beyond its previous ability. To this end, they agree that perception is influenced by the perceiver's thoughts and experiences — thoughts and experiences that are often a part of a shared subjectivity. In defining listening, Oliveros determines that “Sound pressure patterns assist hearing but cultural history and experience influences listening” (Oliveros 3). Kassabian extends this argument and states that we should “stop analyzing music as an object external to us” rather there is a “large field of subjectivity, neither undifferentiated nor individualized, neither simply individual nor reductively social” that connects us to what we hear (Kassabian 8). As Jonathan Williger contends in his review of Deep Listening the album, Oliveros similarly advocates for deep listening as a means to connect with the “many vibrational energies throughout the universe.” That is, “To listen is to be aware of one’s self in that collective whole” (Williger).
Though they may disagree on the modality of listening, they find common ground in its impact to all parts of the body and mind. In the practice of Deep Listening, Oliveros emphasizes the importance of “listening to my listening and discerning the effects on my body-mind continuum” (Oliveros 4). Through Ubiquitous Listening, Kassabian states that there is some affect on the “circuit of bodily responses to stimuli that take place before conscious apprehension” that leaves a residue which “accretes in our bodies, becoming the stuff of future affective responses” (Kassabian 3). In each case, the authors agree that there is some relationship between sound, body, and mind that alters one’s perception indefinitely.  
In combination, Ubiquitous Listening and Deep Listening each present unique opportunities to learn from the sounds and musics we ingest every day. As humans, we are surrounded by information that is constantly shifting and developing our identities, but if we take the time to listen — to truly and deeply listen — we can see in the noise of that information who we really are and we can use what we see (or rather what we hear) to expand our understanding of ourselves as we relate to the greater distributed subjectivity.