Much More than a Gussied Up Promotional Article
Chad Sapieha’s article “Detroit: Become Human review: Much more than a gussied up choose your own A.I. adventure” paints the titular 2018 video game phenomena from Quantic Dream as a esteemed piece of science fiction history. Starting and ending in a real and relatable world, his review presents the game as not only engaging, but philosophically relevant and increasingly important to conversations about technology in an increasingly artificially intelligent world. Throughout the bulk of the piece, he explores, in awe, how Quantic Dream engages its players in a conversation about how we should treat technology as it becomes self-aware and he attempts to convey a message against the subjugation of any and all sentient beings similar to that of the game.
The reviewer himself, Chad Sapieha, is an experienced video games and technology reporter who has written for several news outlets and currently holds a position as a Senior Writer for the National Post, the outlet for which he wrote this article (LinkedIn). His integrity as a reviewer, however, is formed more so by virtue of his writing than by his experience. When he criticizes the sometimes “jarring” transitions between chapters of the game and acknowledges that this is but a “small price to pay” for the elegance of the game, he displays an ability to differentiate between superficial criticisms and criticisms central to the player’s experience, and builds his credibility as a writer by presenting a nuanced argument despite his obvious bias towards the game (Sapieha, par. 14). Moreover, when he mentions others' distaste for the lack of video gamey features or methods of approaching the game divergent from his own, Sapieha makes a habit of examining and validating other perspectives without sacrificing his argument, therefore making his own perspective more palatable to validate and internalize reciprocally for his readers (par. 11, 13). That is not to say that Sapieha doesn’t voice his opinions or challenge other perspectives in any way. Rather, his valuation of each facet of his perspective and his understanding of other perspectives grants the opinions he holds in high regard more credibility than they otherwise may have earned. 
Sapieha’s review is intended for the sci-fi fan and the gamer alike. His references to the works of Issac Asimov and Alex Garland’s Ex Machina and his focus on the high concept aspects of the game indicate his commitment to lovers of such stories (par. 3). Furthermore, his hard-mode attitude towards playing the game without do-overs, in all its glory and pain, is one shared and understood by many casual and hard-core gamers alike (par. 13). As both a semi-casual sci-fi fan and a casual gamer, I fall neatly within his target audience.
Sapieha’s review came out the day before the official release of the game. This informs my thought that his review was written to give the potential initial audiences an understanding of what they will get out of buying this game. Moreover, I can assume that he got an early copy of the game, hence his excitement in sharing such an overwhelmingly positive experience with those who are yet to play the game.
Sapieha applies a few directly and indirectly implied criteria by which he evaluates the quality of the game. Most prominently throughout his article, he highlights the value of the game's distilled message: respect the choices made by agents with the ability to choose. He holds on tightly to the motif of choice, initially introducing it as it relates to his own in-home smart speaker, then examining the importance of choice within the game as both a feature and as a storytelling tool, and finally he concludes by stating “that we need to be sure we’re listening so we can tell when” our technology gains intention (Sapieha). By applying the game’s message as his own, he implies a profound respect for the philosophical depth of Quantic Dream’s flagship development and establishes this message as the central criteria that all other criteria must serve. 
Sapieha also evaluated the quality of the game’s characters, narrative tools, player experience, and entertainment value of the game by their ability to serve the more meta aspects of the game. 
Sapieha declares that he was “utterly enthralled by the three main characters” and their complexity complemented his playing experience by forcing him to “put great care into making the decisions that governed their actions” (par. 12). Through their eyes, he feels the injustice and oppression of this fictional world. Not only does this highlight their aptitude as agents pushing the narrative forward, but as engaging, complex, and almost human characters that he could relate to that inspire concern for how we will treat technology when its intelligence develops any comparable level of emotional sophistication. 
While he does criticize the sometimes jagged storytelling that comes from inconsistencies between play-style and narrative, Sapieha generally praises the means by which the narrative advances what he understands to be its central purpose (par. 14). He brings up images of “police shooting at unarmed suspects and protestors” and “refugees attempting to cross the border... into Canada” to praise the connections to the real world as they serve to create a more relatable story for the players (par. 8). Moreover, he appreciates playing from the perspective of “personal appliances” in a grand “android revolution” as it forces the player to identify with the oppressed and perhaps reevaluate their own position as the oppressors in a thought provoking struggle for sentient technology’s freedom (par. 2). 
He evaluates and heaps praise upon the more superficial but nonetheless important elements of the game including its innovative features, unmatched graphical detail, and its overall engagement. Sapieha notes that players are given “a flowchart of our decisions after each chapter” and appreciates their ability to choose whether or not to use that chart to optimize their narrative as he validates those who do “work backwards and strive for the most positive outcome” (par. 13). He also specifically praises Quantic Dream’s “performance capture technology” as it grants the agents of the game more degrees of freedom in expressing themselves which gives the androids a more human appeal and strengthens the game’s argument on behalf of the androids’ innate humanity (par. 9). Finally, he directly ranks the entertainment value on a binary scale asking whether it kept him “engaged and entertained.” “ …The answer was always a resounding yes” (Sapieha, par. 11).
Each of the criteria that Sapieha applied in his evaluation, perhaps with the exception of the relative sophistication of the graphics technology, are at least somewhat subjective and could inspire many different conclusions for each criterion. For this game specifically, a reviewer might apply their own perspective on civil rights and the future of intelligent computing to determine the aptness of the game’s message; however, I think that would be an ill-willed attempt to apply a false voice to the subject. This game, and many other works like it, applies social commentary to its narrative. To quantify that social commentary would require a benchmark. A benchmark that is, by its own nature, arbitrary and ideological. Instead, Sapieha seeks simply to respect the explicit message of the game - try not to be mean to sentient entities - and bases most of his criteria on their contribution in supporting this message. 
Sapieha’s intentions for this article are many - to justify his excitement about the game, to inspire others to find their own excitement within the game, to argue on behalf of the games outward quality - but he adamantly pushes one purpose for this article: to emphasize the most central message of the game. That is, to question our domineering relationship with technology as it becomes more intelligent. Through his evaluation of the game, he consistently and successfully makes the case for sentient AIs’ rights and he does so powerfully by communicating in the language of those who care the most: tech and sci-fi nerds not unlike myself.