For fifteen minutes, I sat at my desk in my dorm and listened. I listened to the whir of the AC unit, blowing lightly but with a comforting consistency. Never faltering, never sputtering, just whirring like a never ending gust of wind. Then my refrigerator begins to buzz. Like the buzzing of a mechanical beehive. Two tones, a whir and buzz, matching each other in their persistence, creating one unified and beautiful tone. Then the fan turns on in the hallway. A new frequency, but a welcome one. It matches the other two, and without ego, it joins them in song. 
Soon the buzz of the refrigerator dies down, but its song still lingers in my ear. It's as though I can still, I hear its part in the trio, but it's no longer substantial. Some phenomenon of the mind has maintained its buzz, as though I am trying to hold on to the memory of the harmony it once made.
The fan outside soon turns itself off and I am left with just the whir of my AC unit. It feels lonely. Wanting for its partners. But they have given up, and will not rejoin it for some time.
I notice chatter outside but it is muffled by the walls into vague and rhythmic hums. 
The AC unit turns on, now bellowing angrily. Its noise demands all attention. It covers its competitors and tries to blow them away. Then there is a click, as the motor quickly repents for its outburst and returns to a gentle whir.
For a moment, though there is no hope of silence, there is at least peace. Everything is as it should be. 
But more voices disturb the stability. I hear and feel a flurry of movement at the end of the hall. Steps. No, stomps reverberate so deeply and shake my room so fully that they might well have come from my own feet.
In my fifteen minutes, I noticed that there is not much variation in the sounds of my dorm. Whirs, buzzes, muffled voices, and the occasional bout of movement, but not much exceeding those. I noticed that there is rarely stability, but the instability is always predictable. The loudest noises come from within my room, particularly when the AC unit turns its fan on. The softest audible noises come from the AC units outside of my room.