My own evaluation and those displayed in both articles align and diverge in many ways. Richard Brody’s article heavily criticizes the nostalgic gaze of the film and its refusal to address the systemic issues of 1960's Hollywood. In the sense that I think the movie is heavily opinionated about the subject matter, I think Brody captured the outward ideologies of Tarantino's guiding hand well, though at times he could be a bit reductive. The narrative of the movie humanizes the characters through their many flaws to subtly dictate that even this idealized Hollywood is composed of many fallible actors (no pun intended). I agree with Brody that it is a period piece shown through rose colored glasses and ultimately presents a golden age of Hollywood and dreams of its persistence. That is not to say that the film fails to criticize The Golden Age as Brody suggests it does. The article at one point makes note of Tarantino’s insistence on using racial slurs implying that the racism of the film’s characters are aligned with the racist gaze of the film, however I think Tarantino’s use of vulgar language and images is always to challenge the audiences faith in his protagonists with their crude barbarism.
Joe Morgenstern’s review thoroughly enjoyed watching the film through Tarantino’s lens. I think Morgenstern bought into Tarantino's gaze and therefore was along for a much smoother ride, but also was unable to view some of the more jarring moments in the film through his own eyes as I think Tarantino intends. I also thought that this review perhaps did not appreciate the theme of great figures as those who are the most deserving of pity since it focuses quite heavily on the grandeur of this film’s characters.
Brody’s criteria are not met as he places emphasis on the importance of exploring multiple perspectives while Tarantino’s film heavily favors just one. Morgenstern’s criteria are met as he was looking for a movie led by charming front-men that eloquently delivers a fun, funny, extravagant, and well-polished experience.
The WSJ article clearly favors the casual movie-goer looking to watch something fun. Morgenstern’s praise for the overtones of the narrative and its execution inform my thought that his audience is simply looking for an immersive and engaging experience. The New Yorker article, however, focuses more heavily on issues of identity surrounding the film which leads me to believe they are writing for a more progressive and culturally sensitive audience. Brody’s appeals to disdain for Tarentino’s racially biased gaze correlate most strongly with progressive thought therefore I believe that was his intended demographic.
I lie somewhere in the middle of the two audiences. I think it's necessary to apply many perspectives to this film after its conclusion so you can perhaps understand it and its relationship to your identity more deeply, but also I believe it is necessary to accept the experience you are given when you first watch the movie.
As a fan of the movie, the Metacritic score assigned to the New Yorker article made me immediately defensive and less inclined to assign value to this review, but after reading the author's perspective I gained an appreciation for the nuance in it. I was initially more amenable to the WSJ article since its Metacritic score more closely resembled the score I would have given the movie, but ultimately I found the article to oversimplify the film even relative to Brody’s more critical review.
I think the New Yorker review can at times seek to 'change' the work by assigning meaning to its gaze. It refers to how a Tarantino movie always "says—and says and says—what’s on his mind" and goes on to frame the piece as simply fantasy. I don’t think this portion of his review is in service to the work as it does not add anything to the experience of the film, but it seeks to change the experience by placing its own lens over it. Morgenstern’s article on the other hand is much more focused on what made the film what it was, therefore I would say his review served the film.