The field of modern economics, developed to model the activities of a capitalist system, assumes that all participants in a market are rational. I think it would be far-fetched to say that all people in capitalist systems always behave rationally and with their own self-interest in mind, but capitalism and economics developed a system of reason that gives each of its participants a guide to act in a ‘reasonable’ manner that is promoted via self interest. Therefore there is at least some defensible claim to say that capitalism is a “system of the mind” as it establishes a doctrine to describe reason (at least economically). As Galbraith describes it, capitalism is a way to effectively decentralize economic decision making on a large scale. As its success relies on its distributions of actors striving to find economic success through its system of reason, I think it is fair to call this a system of the head since it requires and promotes the activity of many brains thinking and acting within reason and with ingenuity.
Most historians seem to agree that capitalism, if not natural in itself, is rooted in human nature, particularly in the realms of desire for acquisition of wealth, competition, and the pursuit of happiness. Some may feel that these inclinations are solely self-serving and therefore dangerous to promote in the human condition, others that these inclinations are paramount to the fulfilling our desire for self-actualization, and others still may argue that the economic actions taken within capitalism are not grounded in morality but are instead grounded in reason so they should not be included in one's moral evaluation of oneself. For the most part (to generalize a bit), elements of humanism emerge from both pro-capitalists and anti-capitalists. Pro-capitalists often seem to be of the opinion that capitalism improves the average living standard over time so therefore it is a positive system. Anti-capitalist often seem to be of the opinion that capitalism is a blight on the working people as it enshrines their exploitation. Anti-humanism too, is a feature of each camp’s ideology. That is (some) pro-capitalists believe in exploitation for the purpose of beating the competition and (some) anti-capitalists hold much disdain for the individuality that capitalism allows in its constituents. 
One of the most interesting ideas I found in these readings was the concept that we may no longer live in a capitalist America. Not only as a result of increasing government intervention but also as a result of markets developing away from the structures and cycles prescribed by Marx. Rather, as Sombart, Smith and Fulcher describe, we live in an epoch of late capitalism characterized by the spread of industrialization around the world and the increasing expansion of financial capitalism and enterprises, like Apple, that are no longer industrial and cannot be classified by the traditional Marxist definition of capitalist enterprises. Despite these changes from its original classification, however, I think capitalism still has the spirit of ‘economic individualism,’ though this economic individualism is now extended to ventures that are not focused on hard capital. 
