Packer, Rand, Buchanan and Mises all seem to agree that capitalism is a system built for the independent minded, the self-assured, and the rugged individualist. To be certain, these characteristics are commonly seen amongst those who do succeed within capitalism and therefore there is some argument to be made that these characteristics are promoted within capitalism. Moreover, as Packer illustrates in her speech, the prerequisites to success within capitalism are also pre-requisites to lasting happiness. I would argue, along with Rand, that key similarity between all of these features as they relate to capitalism is their connection to self-interest. 
Self-interest is the primary motive for economic reason within capitalism and that has had many downstream effects on the psychology of its constituents. Self-interest takes many forms – social, financial, material, psychological, spiritual, etc. – and often, if it does not harm or exploit others, a beneficial motivator for an individual. Self-interest precipitates self-responsibility which allows people to derive greater and more meaningful satisfaction from the lives they live. However, to structure a society entirely around self-interest can lead to social isolation, failures to attend to dire situations which do not directly benefit the attender, and systemic distortions of what is truly in one's own self-interest (as we see in those stricken by affluenza). Buchanan believes that any desire for distributionist socialism is derived from an insecurity of one’s own ability to take responsibility for themselves. I would argue, on the contrary, that distributionist leanings often seek to address the negative externalities of a system designed entirely around self-interest as well as to offset some of its more negative psychological consequences. 
Capitalistic self-interest promotes some of the psychological prerequisites for happiness, but it can also penalize other necessities for happiness like family time, leisure, and community among those rugged individualists who do not have the good grace of enough wealth to slow down for a moment. As we saw in Sandel’s article, there are some parts of the human experience that are not amenable to the free market and these can and will be eroded under capitalism if and when markets are given the chance to find their way into them. 
