Paragraph 1: Determine and then accurately summarize/synthesize and substantiate with some evidence ONE key argument (or, for fiction, an analytical theme) from the assigned texts of the week. An argument answers a how or why question. 50%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses). 


Paragraph 2: Put one idea raised in these texts into “conversation” with an idea raised in a previous course reading or film. Take care in determining which texts make sense to connect. Make a case for why it is important to think about the two texts/ideas in relation to one another, going beyond a simple “this idea resembles that idea.” 25%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses). 


Paragraph 3: Analyze how one aspect of the reading(s) significantly challenges or otherwise complicates the way you think about a particular issue or topic. Be as specific as possible. 25%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses).




Dunbar-Ortiz pushes against the presentation of America as a country of immigrants suggesting that the phrase removes the responsibility from the country’s settler-colonial history since “immigrants join existing polities whereas settlers create new ones” (Dunbar-Ortiz, 50) White America’s eagerness to declare the native American nations of North America ‘dead’ and self-indigenize as the native population are just a few of the settler habits that prevent this from simply being a nation of immigrants (Dubar-Ortiz, 46-47).
Ghosh references how the story of an alleged conspiracy to overthrow Dutch ending in the execution of several Englishmen in Amboyna was twisted as a ‘massacre’ by the despicable Dutch, and through the power of print, the narrative of a British victimhood was accepted influencing the English takeover of New Amsterdam (Ghosh, 43-45). Anderson’s concept of print capitalism evidently is not only a force for nation building, but by manipulating the collective consciousness it can inspire those nations to colonial expansion. 
Though I am ashamed of my ignorance, I understood the fate of the native American nations of North America to be largely caused by the fact that they did not have any resistance to European disease and thought that direct British violence only played a relatively small role in their genocide. I was never presented with a case against immunological determinism nor the extent to which the Europeans facilitated the spread and deadliness of the disease through the pressure they applied both directly and indirectly (Ghosh, 60-62). 