Corruption is not a problem localized to just the United States in the period directly after Citizens United. It is an ailment that afflicts all nations of all shapes and sizes. It is inherent to any power structure, yet even in a country that defines itself by its idealistic affinity for democracy, money and power have always managed to quell that idealism in practice. The seventh president of the United States, Andrew Jackson, though known for several major political missteps including, but not limited, to his large role in causing the Panic of 1837 and in his genocidal Trail of Tears, brought about the modern system of campaigning. As voting rights expanded throughout America to allow universal white male suffrage, so too expanded the need to rally the people. Jackson excelled in this field going as far as to hold an uproarious “open house” at the White House leading to a fair share of property damage and stolen goods, but most importantly, demarking a new era in politics. As a direct result of Jacksonian democracy, the source of a campaign’s financing became increasingly significant as a means for the wealthy to continue to subvert democracy. By the election of 1856, campaign finance dominated the political process so wholly that it led “Republican boss of New York, Thurlow Weed, to define the difference between the winner (Buchanan) and the loser (John C. Frémont) as $50,000” (Fleming). The issue of money in politics lies not only in the explicit bribery that any reasonable and societally minded person would look down upon but also in the implicit bribery that plagues our ‘representative’ systems. When it comes time for politicians and other government representatives to campaign for reelection, naturally they must turn to those willing to grant them the most money or assistance. As they solicit their campaign funds, they are forced to pander the monied interests and in this process, their perception of the public desire becomes warped by the desires of their generous donors. Representative John Sarbanes found that when he committed to a strict goal of small-donor donations before he could access his larger funds, the experiment changed his behavior overnight. “[He] changed the kind of narrative and message that [he] was leading with as a result of all this” (Sarbanes). He argues that when a politician does not have to rely on small-dollar donations, “they don’t have to be accountable to the broad, diverse majority electorate out there, [so] it’s much easier for extreme elements and extreme voices to get traction inside of that [system].” Throughout history, the dynamic between wealth and power has warped our politics, albeit to varying degrees in different periods, in the favor of the already wealthy and to the detriment of the rest of the population. Money in politics influenced the interests of the framers in the formation of the United States away from the democracy America holds so dear, it led the leaders in the Gilded Age to ignore the plights of the general population; especially the working class, and it has altered the legislation of the current day to expand inequality and tear away at the very fabric of society.
Despite the reverence with which many people view it, the founding of the United States of America was deeply intertwined with the individual interests of the framers of the Constitution many of whom were extraordinarily wealthy. George Washington, for instance, was the second richest president in American history with a peak net worth of 594.2 million dollars. However, the exorbitant privilege does not stop with him. James Maddison’s wealth peaked at 114.7 million dollars; John Adams at 21.5 million; Thomas Jefferson at 239.7 million; John Hancock at 9.3 million and so on (Hoff). Though often portrayed as faithful representatives of the people of the United States, many of these politicians were far from average American men that achieved their success by their own genius. For some of the framers, to state that this wealth may have distorted their understanding of the country would be a criminal understatement. Charles Pinckney, a South Carolina representative and heir to a large plantation family, went so far as to suggest “that the Presidency should be limited to people worth $100,000—well over a million dollars in today’s money—and the federal judiciary and Congress to those worth half that sum” (Flemming). Thankfully, though, Benjamin Franklin prevented the proposal from ever becoming law. Many elitist proposals, however, did successfully manage to make their way into the Constitution. While in some instances good intentioned, there was a broad consensus that the American people as a whole were far too brutish to actually govern themselves. Elbridge Gerry, a politician in this era, went as far as to say that “the evils we experience flow from an excess of democracy” (Simpson). The original constitution allowed the scope of suffrage only to extend to propertied white males over the age of 21 leaving the vast majority of American inhabitants wholly unrepresented. Moreover, many of the framers were the overseers of massive plantations, and though slavery was integral to the economy of the South, the southern framers often held slaves numbering in the hundreds while the vast majority of slave owners held around 1-5 slaves and around 75% of slave state households held no slaves at all (Bourne). Such a disproportionate representation of slaveholders resulted in several key compromises that gave the slaver’s interests more representation than they were reasonably due as in the case of the “Three-Fifths Compromise and Fugitive Slave Clause and in less obvious [instances] such as the Electoral College, which gave slave states a larger say in electing the president that their voting population alone would have warranted” (Simpson). Despite their many attacks on democracy, the founding fathers, to their credit, did much for the average free white man. With the consolidation of thirteen states’ economies, working people prospered. “In Philadelphia, for example, the daily wages of laborers doubled between 1790 and 1796,” and through Hamilton’s approach to paying off states’ war debts, “the Treasury Department stabilized purchasing power and reduced the tax burden on typical Americans by up to 90 percent” (Simpson). Despite offering these tangible benefits to the average free white man, the founders, as a consequence of their elite perspectives, failed to improve the lot of the rest of the population especially in the case of their black constituents.
The period from around 1870 to 1900 known as the Gilded Age was a period of massive economic growth, largely due to the universal mistreatment and poor wages of the working class who fueled it, and in some industries, as detailed in Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle, the very low quality of the goods produced. Large businesses were able to get away with such egregious practices primarily as a result of the government’s “laissez-faire” approach to the economy, but their constant lobbying and significant campaign contributions certainly helped in keeping such loose regulatory oversight. In the words of one Times - Philadelphia writer in 1891, “it is not the fault of Chairman Waters that he is compelled to appeal for contributions. He could no more conduct a campaign in Pennsylvania now without the liberal employment of the boodle element than he could scale Niagra in a handbasket.” In this particular period, not too dissimilar from today, politics and money were inextricably linked allowing monopolies like Rockefeller’s Standard Oil, Carnegie’s Steel Company, and the various railroad companies to thrive with few to no impediments and in some cases with the assistance of the government. The reach that these large industries had extended so far that “48 of the 73 men who held cabinet posts between 1868 and 1896 either lobbied for railroads, served railroad clients, sat on railroad boards, or had relatives connected to the railroads” (Reich 114). This blatant corruption clearly had an impact on the fairness of American democracy, but unlike the monied interests at play in the framing of the constitution, this largely worked to the detriment of the average white man along with reducing the lot of average people as a whole. The undue influence of large railroad monopolies in the politics of this era gave them the power to consistently and easily beat out any potential competitors. Railroad companies controlled massive expanses and could tightly control the cost of their services as there were few or no other options for commuters and anyone wishing to transport their goods. Ultimately, the corruption of railroad influence compounded in the events of the Pullman Strike in which President Grover Cleveland sent federal troops to Chicago to enforce a court ruling that demanded the strike be broken up. This act resulted in a riot killing 13 civilians, wounding 53, and burning down a railroad yard (Blount). As said by Woodrow Wilson, “if there are men in this country big enough to own the government of the United States, they are going to own it” (Reich 115)
Decentralized powerful entities will almost always attempt to manipulate the behavior of centralized power if given the opportunity. This has been seen in the case of corporations commandeering the legislative process for their own competitive advantage and was seen in the 1930’s debacle involving New York City’s politics and the power center at Tammany Hall. Tammany Hall had helped their members “with everything from heating to health care, negotiating with landlords and sometimes paying in exchange for constituents’ votes” (Blakemore). More importantly, it was controlled by the New York Mob. The entity acted as a sort of pseudo-government consented to and given power by its large membership granting them several individual benefits in return to ensure their continued support. By the 1930s, it had “woven its way into every level of city politics” (Blakemore). As any unelected government is liable to do, Tammany got involved in numerous illicit practices such as framing women for the purpose of gouging their pockets through lawyer’s fees and extortionate bail premiums. Tammany Hall governed through bribes and favors, in one case Mayor Walker of NYC “was the winner of a quarter of a million dollars without having a cent invested. The stock was margined for him by a friend and in his name and he reaped the benefit without a dollar risked or the least effort on his part” (“Easy Money”). Tammany Hall had completely overturned the democratic process in favor of an unbound system that was riddled with crime and yet acted with complete impunity. 
Though the administrations of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft did much to reclaim the American political system from the oligarchal powers that controlled it, the current campaign finance system has since regressed to a level comparable to that of the Gilded Age. Our current situation resulted from several landmark Supreme Court cases that returned much political influence back to the monied interests. Firstly, in 2002 “the Buckley decision of the U.S. Supreme Court allows individuals, groups, and corporations to spend unlimited amounts on behalf of or against a candidate, as long as such expenditures are not coordinated with candidate or party campaigns,” and secondly in 2010, the Citizens United v FEC expanded those rights to corporations and unions overturning McCain-Feingold Act of 2002 which made “it a crime for a group to finance, advertise and distribute a movie highly critical of a presidential candidate (in this case Hillary Clinton) just because the group was organized as a corporation.” (Ansolabehere et al. 6; Gora). PACs, or Political Action Committees, were created in the wake of the Buckley v Valeo decision. By law, “organizations may cover the start-up, administrative and fund-rising expenses of their PACs, but they may not give money directly from the organization’s treasury to the PAC for the purpose of contributing to a federal campaign.” Moreover, “PACs may give $10,000 in a two-year election cycle to a candidate ($5,000 each calendar year)”  (Ansolabehere et al. 5). Super PACs on the other hand can take unlimited donations from corporations, individuals, or unions and function to advocate for the purpose of independent political activity, again, “as long as such expenditures are not coordinated with candidate or party campaigns.” The foundation of the argument supporting PACs and Super PACs is that the decisions protect “the free-speech rights of business corporations, nonprofit organizations, labor unions, media outlets and the myriad groups that people form and use to press their views and amplify their voices, especially on public issues” therefore granting these organizations the same rights as individuals. A common criticism of this argument is that the ‘free speech’ Citizens United protects is oftentimes in the form of money and that most people do not have the same magnitude of this ‘free speech’ as large corporations. The power these organizations have in todays political system, therefore, is not inherently in their ability to promote or attack certain political candidates in an unprovable quid pro quo with the benefitting political candidate (though the value of this assertion should not be discounted), but in the capabilities it grants massive corporations to influence elections to their own benefit through unrelenting messaging.  “Problems of endogeneity and legality make isolating the effect of contributions on policy difficult to disentangle[, though it has been shown ]... that business PACs contribute to seek short-term access to legislators with policy-relevant influence, rather than cultivating long-term relationships or influencing electoral outcomes to assist ideologically aligned legislators” (Powell and Grimmer 2-3). Campaign financing issues have also led many to question the authority of the military-industrial complex in the United States’ decisions relating to foreign affairs. As the private market began to take a larger role in our military’s functions, Dwight D. Eisenhower warned “against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex[, noting that] the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist” (Eisenhower). Since then, the so-called defense contractors and their associates have taken many positions in the bodies intended to keep them in check. Most prominently, the current US Defense Secretary, General Lloyd Austin, who was previously a director of Raytheon, a large so-called defense contracting company. Though admittedly, there is little direct evidence that such potentially illicit appointments have had any influence on the United States’ foreign policy, it is unlikely that the close relationship between private military enterprise and the government has not in any way affected budgetary spending, foreign policy, or trade deals. Such links can similarly be made to other industries that supplied Trump’s administration with 509 ‘revolvers,’ “individuals who worked in the influence industry before or after their government service” ("Revolving Door").
The influence of money in the United States politics since its foundation has restricted the democratic process, allowed for amoral and illegal practices to go unpunished, reduced the lot of working people, contributed to the institutionalization of slavery, and potentially influenced its military policies. Unfortunately, there is likely no practical means of wholly and permanently returning power to the people as the corruption that money can cause is innate in any system that allows for individual enterprise and promotes the pursuit of wealth, or as the author Henry Demarest Lloyd wrote in 1894, “liberty produces wealth, and wealth destroys liberty” (Reich, 113). That is not to say that there are no actions that could be taken to mitigate the anti-democratic influence of those with money. The primary solution, and the most likely one to be implemented, would be the various campaign financing reforms proposed in HR1 in conjunction with the overturning of the Citizens United decision. The facet of HR1 that is most focused on campaign finance, in particular, would be the government’s pledge to match campaign funds in an effort funded by fines from white-collar criminals only if the candidate can “abide by certain limits[. They] have to voluntarily say we will not take more than $1,000 from any candidate, [and] they have to demonstrate that they can raise a lot of money in small donations” (Sarbanes). Other initiatives have been proposed such as a patriot dollar which would be a $50 ATM card given to every American that can only be used for the purpose of campaign donations to promote a greater focus from candidates on small-dollar donations, though, the likelihood of this policy’s implementation is significantly slimmer than the passing of HR1. In any case, it is clear that something needs to be done to give at least a reasonable sum of democracy back to the people as a whole in order to prevent a return to the poor living standards, widespread poverty, massive environmental damage, and monopolization of the Gilded Age.