From the end of the revolution, Alexander Hamilton had worked together to form a stable conglomeration of the American states and Thomas Jefferson had worked to grow America’s global presence. Hamilton helped in the arrangement of the Constitutional Convention at the Annapolis Convention in 1786 after the Articles of Confederation had exhibited a number of failures, largely financial, that could not be overlooked. A year later, soon after this monumental event, Hamilton was a part of three vocal New York advocates for the newly created Constitution and together they wrote the Federalist papers arguing for the need of a more reliable central government and gaining support for ratification. Through this, Jefferson was mediating American commercial relations in France, but he was to return in 1789 and soon he would meet his chief political rival. In the 1790s, both Jefferson and Hamilton wanted to pay off the public debt and establish good credit for the United States, however, the pair were in opposition related to the American identity in terms of foreign policy with Britain and France, dictating the basis of the new United States economy, and how the constitution should be applied in establishment of the Bank of the United States demonstrating the vast separation between each man’s views and eventually leading to the creation of the two-party system.
The French Revolution sent ripples throughout the world provoking European monarchies and dividing American foreign policy. As he had spent five years in France, Jefferson held some sympathies for the French people and, as he was the writer of the constitution, he supported their fight against an oppressive monarchy. As the French Revolution began to create conflict with other major monarchies, specifically Britain, Jefferson immediately took the side of the French. Hamilton, on the other hand, horrified by the Reign of Terror in France and viewing Britain as America’s primary partner in trade took the side of the English, if not in war than at least in commerce. Jefferson, in his support of the French, argued the case of the Franco-American Alliance of 1778 which was labeled with an indefinite term, thus, should be honored by this young nation, but Washington, ultimately leaning towards Hamilton’s perspective of supporting America’s economy without bringing unnecessary strife upon the feeble country, decided to issue the Proclamation of Neutrality in 1793. Edmond Genet, a French delegate, arrived around this time making wild promises and attempting to coerce America into war with Britain and France. Genet failed to diplomatically goad America to join the French cause, but he found, through hiring privateers from the United States to attack British ships, he may be able to force Washington into the conflict. Britain responded in turn with the rampant impressment of American vessels testing the resolve of the United States; though, Washington remained consistent with his previous position. Jefferson saw this British response as intolerable, and in the heated discussions resulting in support of neutrality, he resigned to plan his presidential campaign. Hamilton’s commerce-based approach to foreign policy was again implemented.
As the country was still growing and forming, the issue of industry versus agriculture caused discord between Jefferson and Hamilton. Despite coming from a wealthy background, Jefferson was sympathetic with the small southern farmers of the United States thus adamantly argued to keep the agrarian economy of the past, and once again, Hamilton adamantly disagreed. Hamilton issued a Report of Manufactures reasoning that agrarian countries cannot grow financially because the cost of their imports will always meet or exceed that of their exports, so industry must be nourished to increase America’s economic strength. He suggested protective tariffs for the manufactures and subsidies to nurture them into large businesses and other businesses would subsequently grow. Jefferson, fearful of the damages of hasty industrialization seen in England, refuted Hamilton’s points. He saw the social effects that industrialization had on English cities. Child labor ran unchecked, rapid urbanization led to over-populated cities and underpaid workers with the side effects of crime, poverty, and various other societal plights. Jefferson’s rationale was evidently based on the social benefit of the people, while Hamilton’s was inherently for the economic growth of the country as a whole.
After assuming the debts of the states, Hamilton’s financial plan involved the creation of a private bank to act as a stronghold for the central government’s wealth with the power to print money. Hamilton’s intention was to have a secure place in which America’s money could be held yet also remain in circulation. Though, Jefferson took issue with the constitutionality of its inherent institution. As a state’s rights advocate, Jefferson treasured the tenth amendment that dictated that the powers not otherwise designated or restricted were reserved to the states. Thus, since the right to create banks was not delegated to the federal government, it must be a right of the states. Hamilton countered this argument citing the elastic clause that allowed congress to pass any laws “necessary and proper” to enact their enumerated powers which included various powers relating to the finances of the national government. Jefferson represented the strict construction perspective on the Constitution while Hamilton represented the loose constructive perspective. 
Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton’s diverse perspectives on the French Revolutionary Wars in their support for France and Britain, respectively, on forming an agrarian versus an industry-based economy, and on strict and loose construction represented the polar differences of their perspectives as Americans and ultimately introduced the two-party system with Hamilton’s Federalists and Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans. This set a precedent that would be followed through the modern-day in which a conservative and a liberal party represent the people. Though this system would divide the country in the Civil War, it accommodates both minority and majority interests and has ultimately survived the test of time in the United States.