America has been the battleground for a centuries-old civil war between the interests of the wealthy and the soul of democracy. At its conception, the framers allowed only propertied white males to vote in elections. Such a repressive limitation of the electorate is fundamentally anti-democratic and could more accurately be described as a tyranny of the few and fortunate. The founding fathers themselves were among the most fortunate of those few, beyond even the wildest aspirations of any common person of the time — George Washington, for instance, at his peak wealth controlled a net worth of 594.2 million US dollars when adjusted for inflation1. Around 1828, as universal white male suffrage became increasingly accepted throughout the United States, Andrew Jackson’s bid for election marked the first advent of a popular campaign that sought to appeal to a broad audience of constituents. Furthermore, Andrew Jackson championed a practice known as the “spoils system,” the practice of granting political office to the supporters of the victorious party or candidate, and though it is considered to largely have been dissolved through the Pendleton Act in 1877 and subsequent deterrents, its essence remains in today’s politics.
As mass appeal campaigns became the prevailing method of attaining office, the contributions of large donors became ever more important to the campaigner who now needed substantial funds to reach such a broad audience. Legislators and public opinion had begun to see the danger inherent to leaving public officials at the whims of wealthy private interests and this suspicion became inescapably apparent in the presidential election of 1896 where William McKinley received $16 million, what was at the time an outrageous sum of money. The source of the controversy lay not only in the exorbitant spending but in the way Mark Hanna, McKinley’s chief fundraiser, acquired about $6 million of those funds from large corporations by promising them favorable policies2. Under the leadership of the powerfully anti-corruption Theodore Roosevelt, the Tillman Act of 1907 stopped the direct contributions from corporations and national banks to campaigns that enraged the public in that 1896 controversy. After the Great Depression, labor unions were added to the list of those who could not directly make campaign contributions, so the growing list of special interest groups without the ability to donate to political candidates began to form Political Action Committees (PACs) which would raise funds from individual members of these groups for specific candidates2. The landmark Buckley v. Valeo Supreme Court case of 1976 broadened the potential for these PACs to exert their support and began the modern age of campaign finance debates. The court’s decision allowed organizations like labor unions and corporations “may cover the start-up, administrative and fund-raising expenses of their PACs, but they may not give money directly from the organization’s treasury to the PAC with the intent that it be contributed to a federal campaign”14. The PACs themselves were granted the ability to donate up to $10,000 to any individual candidate in a two-year election cycle14. In 2010, another landmark Supreme Court case, Citizens United v. FEC, established committees that are now known as ‘Super PACs.’ These evolved PACs cannot donate directly to candidates but can take unlimited money from organizations to advocate for or against political positions and make unlimited expenditures in this effort so long as they are not coordinated with the candidate or candidates that they benefit.
While the majority of the Burger and the Roberts courts that consented to those decisions, respectively, would argue that they applied sufficient stipulations to outlaw any quid pro quo relationship between wealthy interests and the candidates they support, others argue that the simple act of making a large donation can influence the behavior of a candidate. In the words of Representative John Sarbanes, “the place you go to get that money is…  to [the] deep-pocketed donors, the high-end political donor class, PACs, lobbyists, and they’re going to have influence over you. It’s just human nature; you become dependent on them… you tend to give them more deference, they get more access to you. That’s just the way things work” 3. Though the extent to which money has infiltrated our political system may be a subject of debate, it is undeniable that it has some impact, illicit or simply implicit, on the decision-making and policies of the government. The influence of wealth in American politics is pervasive throughout our government’s systems and traditions functioning to the detriment of America’s most prized ideal — a free and equal democratic process — as best seen in the response to the 2008 recession.
The most potent debate in the realm of money in politics surrounds the question of whether money can be equated to free speech. Many would argue people should be able to use their own money as they please, especially in the case of political advocacy. In this sentiment lies a dangerous implication that free speech does not have to be equally distributed. Those with more money are entitled to greater quantities of free speech by virtue of their own wealth. Such a thought has brought this country to stray further away from representative democracy and closer to economic and political oligarchy. A 2014 study by Martin Gilens and Benjamin Page at Princeton University concluded that “economic elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no independent influence”4. Moreover, that same study found that “net interest-group alignments are not significantly related to the preferences of average citizens,” and that the “net alignments of the most influential, business-oriented groups are negatively related to the average citizen’s wishes”4. The prevailing interpretation of the first amendment has allowed special interests that do not represent the general will to take American democracy hostage and bend its policies to their benefit. 
Affluent organizations and the individuals they represent have found several means by which they can manipulate the political system to their advantage that all have some undeniable effect on the outcomes of the legislative process. The most commonly understood method of exerting political influence is the use of lobbying. Lobbyists are often employed by a firm that, under an agreement with a company or other special interest group, will advocate for certain policy positions. Lobbyists are not legally permitted to pay a politician for their assent to a policy position, but many groups have found several ways around this limitation. In a 2018 study controlling for ideological agreement between the senator and the group and home-state connections, it was shown that “senators are more likely to perform legislative favors for lobbyists who fundraise for them than for lobbyists and groups that do not” 3. While not necessarily at the direction of special interest groups, industries often employ people from the bodies that are intended to regulate them, and on the flip side, regulators frequently have a history of employment in the industries they are meant to regulate. This cycle of regulator to regulatee and vice versa is known as the “revolving door of regulators,” and those who make this transition are often called “revolvers”. For example, President Biden’s current Secretary of Defense, along with being a former top general, was on the board of the defense contracting company Raytheon and therefore would be considered a revolver. This tradition of a revolving door of regulators stems, partially at least, from President Jackson’s spoils system as it is often companies with the closest relationship to the victorious administration that will find their employees (or owners) at work in the very bodies intended to regulate them. The conflict of interest seemingly inherent to such a system has been empirically proven to at least some degree in an analysis of the behavior of patent examiners. In an analysis of the activity of more than 10,000 patent examiners between 2001 and 2015 including more than 1,000,000 patent applications, “revolving-door examiners granted 10-16 percent more patents to companies for which they went to work” 6. Though this statistic paints a damning picture, the relationship cannot be considered causal since its conclusion is based solely on statistical analysis. Some would argue that industry insiders are the most knowledgeable and therefore the most qualified candidates for positions as regulators, and in certain cases, they would be correct, but the blatant favoritism of certain large companies and the appointment of those with an obvious conflict of interest should be intolerable, despite being such a common practice in the United States government. 
One of the strongest and most widely impactful examples of the influence of money in politics was in the 2008 financial crisis and, more specifically, in the federal government’s reaction to it. The financial crisis was the result of the widespread use of conniving and generally unscrupulous practices throughout the home loan industry and throughout Wall Street. Retail lenders and commercial banks became increasingly dependent on subprime mortgages as a large source of their income, if not as the primary source of it. Wall Street investment firms and banks bundled these mortgages into complicated mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Credit rating agencies proceeded to inappropriately mark many of these bundles with AAA ratings, the highest possible rating, and therefore placing significantly more risk on the buyer of a bundle than they had signed up for. When subprime mortgage creditors started to default on their mortgages because housing prices fell and they could no longer refinance, their lenders, in turn, began to crumble. Moreover, the mortgage-backed securities and CDOs that contained these defaulting subprime mortgages failed, causing the investment firms and banks that sold them to lose billions of dollars and the buyers of the bundles to completely lose their investment. The devastating ripples of this crash were felt throughout the American economy causing it to take a drastic downturn paired with millions of foreclosures. The Bush administration, led by Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, quickly went to work creating the Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 in response to the crisis which gave $700 billion to the banks through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, TARP, which would buy mortgage-backed securities and shares from the endangered banks. 
The creation and execution of the TARP program were wrought with implicit bribery and conflicts of interest. Firstly, Paulson was, prior to his employment in the Bush cabinet, the CEO of Goldman Sachs, a company that received $10 billion of the $700 billion payout, for thirty-one years7. Furthermore, Paulson’s company admitted in 2016 to playing a large role in the crash as it engaged in the practice of providing subprime mortgages and selling poorly labeled residential mortgage-backed securities8. Goldman Sachs, that is their “PACs, their individual members or employees or owners, and those individuals' immediate families,” was also the fifth highest contributor to Bush’s campaign paying a total of $396,350 towards his campaign9. The top contributor to the 2004 Bush campaign was the American multinational investment bank, Morgan Stanley, with $604,280 who also received $10 billion as a part of the TARP program 9, 10. 
Supporters of the Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 and its TARP program may argue that it was actually sound and reasonably thought out legislation that was ultimately successful, though the millions of people foreclosed on due to the one-sided bank-only approach to stimulus. When the bill was passed in 2008 by President Bush, the 95 House Democrats that had previously opposed it were convinced by the promise that the Treasury secretary would be empowered with the ability to “facilitate loan modifications to prevent avoidable foreclosures” 11. Additionally, the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury decided against the purchase of toxic assets and instead provided large banks such as Citigroup and Goldman Sachs with direct cash injections. TARP at this time was under the direction of Neel Kashkari, a former Goldman Sachs investment banker11. The provision to earn the favor of the Democrats was dropped within days of the bill’s passing and, along with the unilateral decision of the Fed and Treasury, this caused an angered Congress on both sides of the aisle to propose legislation in January 2009 to cancel $350 billion in TARP funding. To quell the temper of Congress, then-President-elect Barack Obama’s economic advisor, Larry Summers, sent them letters laying out a five-point populist program to help the average American. TARP was again accepted by Congress and, needless to say, almost none of Summer’s proposals were implemented with the exception of less than 2% of TARP funds being earmarked for foreclosure relief12. President Obama announced the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) in February 2009 designating $50 billion to grant some financial support to anywhere between 3 and 4 million homeowners facing foreclosure. $50 billion turned into $30 billion by 2010 of which only $10.2 billion was actually spent to help less than 1 million people11, 12. Of those that managed to receive assistance loan modifications, one in three re-defaulted on their mortgages12. As has been evidenced, TARP and the Economic Stabilization Act were never intended to help the ordinary American, rather they were manipulated by unscrupulous practices by parties representing the interests of the banks and forsaking the unfortunate United States citizen.
Today, America’s prized democracy faces its greatest threat. Not one of violence or outright authoritarianism, instead, it is preyed upon silently by the very institutions it fostered. As said by Henry Demarest Lloyd, “Liberty produces wealth, and wealth destroys liberty.” The power wielded by moneyed interests has placed the very soul of this nation in jeopardy and we the people are obligated to raise our voices in protest. To begin, the Supreme court decisions Buckley v. Valeo and Citizens United v. FEC must be overturned. The implications of these rulings have violated the egalitarian nature of free speech in a democracy, smothering the voices of ordinary Americans under the repressive bellowing of corporations. The recent proposal of H.R. 1 represents a glimmer of hope against the increasingly powerful special interests. It promises to match the campaign funds of political candidates that do not accept big money paid for by the fines of white-collar criminals, demands increased transparency for political advertising, and expands the ease of enfranchisement granting greater influence to the ordinary American3, 13. Other solutions have been proposed that could radically alter the incentive structures of our politicians. For example, in 2003, Bruce Ackerman and Ian Ayres proposed the “Patriot Dollar,” a $50 ATM card given to every American that can only be used for the purpose of campaign donations to promote a greater focus from candidates on small-dollar donations. More strict qualifications should be put in place to prevent flagrant conflicting interests from dominating our government’s most fundamental agencies. No matter the solution proposed, the current feeble condition of democracy in the United States is impermissible. To be enfranchised is a powerful thing therefore it is every voter’s duty to know where their favored candidate receives their support and, with that knowledge, cast their ballot according to their conscience. 