In this essay, I examine the morality and ethics of automation, specifically with the emergence of artificial intelligence, in relation to capitalism. The essay examines the morality of automation by considering opposing philosophies on capitalism's morality: Objectivism and Marxism. Using this analysis, the essay argues, based on Rand and Marx's key takeaways, for a particular view on automation, particularly in relation to AI development. As my intended career path is closely related to the development of AI and recent technological advancements are already causing societal changes, this topic is both of significant interest to me and concern for the world.

Change is the only constant. In five words said more than two thousand years before there was even a suggestion of an idea of capitalism, Heraclitus captured the essence of this formidable system we toil within. In Marx’s words capitalism and the bourgeois “cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole relations of society… All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away; all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air.” (Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 24) To a large degree, this revolution is driven by automation. In 1436, before capitalism had taken hold as a dominant system, Johannes Gutenberg, driven by market pressures (a failing business and immense debt) created what was arguably the most revolutionary automation in history: the printing press (Johann Gutenberg). In the subsequent centuries, information itself was set on a path towards complete decentralization and humanity could but watch as the walls that barred the commoner from accessing texts “melt[ed] into air.” At the heights of the industrial revolution, Eli Whitney, then the “penniless” inventor of the Cotton Gin had the idea to create standardized parts for manufacturing so even an “an unskilled man [could] turn out a product that would be just as good as one made by a highly trained machinist” (“The Inventor | The Eli Whitney Museum and Workshop”). His process would then require only a few smaller automations to create products with little human intervention as we see in thousands of factories worldwide today. The work of great scientists like Charles Babbage and Alan Turing allowed the first computers to digitize information and automate simple tasks of consistent logical reasoning. 
In the procession of history, many automations have been made across many disciplines and many industries. Still, they can broadly be characterized as either task automation like the invention of the printing press, process automation like the use of interchangeable parts made possible by Eli Whitney, or digital automation like the user interfaces we use to order food at Panera Bread. To be clear, automation does not always entail the replacement of the people who previously did those tasks, rather it may serve to complement those tasks just as the user interface at Panera reduces the traffic at the counter for the person taking orders. 
Before we were limited to these types of automation and combinations of them, but a new type of automation is emerging that may have consequences even more significant than those I have previously mentioned. Intelligent automation can recreate tasks once thought too abstract for machines. Artificial Intelligence (AI), a term that I will use to describe the technology and applications of deep learning and machine learning, has made leaps and bounds over the past decade but is now improving exponentially. ChatGPT and DALLE-2 introduced the world to the potential of generative models, and since their recent releases, millions of people have integrated these models into their workflows and AI products have exploded in popularity. Out of these innovations emerge dozens if not hundreds of moral complications and innovations, but this is, according to the leaders of AI technology companies, only the beginning. A great race has been in progress between tech giants and smaller but innovative entrepreneurs alike toward a technology that would fundamentally change the way we exist as a species. The race toward Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) – AI systems that can emulate human-like intelligence with access to the computing power of thousands of human minds. And though the finish line may not yet be in sight, the competitors are charging towards it faster today than they ever have before. These systems have already shown the capability to complete tasks that require common sense, complex reasoning, and creativity (Bubeck, et al. 2017).
It is in the light of AI and AGI that it is necessary to consider the morality of automation within capitalism and in some cases without in all its forms so we can create some framework to understand the ethical implications of AI and AGI. In this paper, I aim to approach this goal by evaluating the perspectives of two of the most prominent philosophical perspectives on the morality of capitalism: Marxism and Objectivism. These philosophies represent two extremes by which capitalism has been evaluated morally and therefore can establish a more complete set of arguments for and against the automation of capitalist production and their logical extensions to intelligent automation.

Objectivism is the philosophical system of Ayn Rand that “holds that there is no higher realm beyond the natural world perceivable by the senses, that nature is governed by a causal order discoverable by science, and that man is an animal who, like other animals, is part of that order” (Kelley 2008: 363). Importantly, it is atheistic and therefore only deals with values that can be represented in our observable reality, yet it is not materialist because it exalts the mind which is deeply connected to but not entirely explainable by physical reality. Above all, objectivism holds that since there is only objective reality and we have the capability to reason about it consistently, there is only one set of philosophical values that can objectively emerge from reason. The objectivist’s ultimate goal in life is the pursuit of happiness. That is, the objectivist sees happiness as a long-term sort of contentment and satisfaction in life that is not a means or an end but simply an ideal. As objectivists see reason as the only means of understanding the world, reason is therefore man’s highest virtue and the pursuit of happiness must be approached with reason. While objectivists reject the existence of positive rights like the right to eat or the right to healthcare, from the objectivist perspective, individuals have fundamental negative rights to own property and to own themselves in mind and body. Objectivists believe that egoism, the suggestion that “individuals should pursue their own self-interest, that it is right for people to act to advance their own lives and happiness”, is the only just and true ethic whereas altruism, living with only other’s interests in mind, is fundamentally opposed to the rights of an individual to own himself because “altruism demands that a person subordinate her own interest to that of others” (Smith 1995: 62, 72). Because objectivism exalts the individual, objectivism contends that laissez-faire capitalism is the only moral socio-economic system regardless of its productivity. Moreover, capitalism does not only embody objectivist values, it reinforces objectivist virtues. Objectivists see productiveness, independence, and honesty as a few of the virtues that one should aspire to. Productiveness because “productive work is the process by which man's mind sustains his life, the process that sets man free of the necessity to adjust himself to his background, as all animals do, and gives him the power to adjust his background to himself”; independence because “requires that one form one’s own judgments”; and honesty, because it requires “man's recognition of the fact that values pertain to reality—that things are what they are” (Peikoff 1991) To the objectivist “Productive work is the central purpose of a rational man’s life, the central value that integrates and determines the hierarchy of all his other values. Reason is the source, the precondition of his productive work—pride is the result” (Rand, “The Objectivist Ethics,” 1961: 21). Understanding these fundamental principles of Ayn Rand’s philosophy, we can extrapolate her perspectives on automation. 
In essence, Rand would support most if not all forms of automation in the past as they offer “the power that expands the potential of your life by raising the productivity of your time” (Rand, “For the New Intellectual,” 1963: 245). As automation replaces the menial and repetitive tasks required to develop a product, the individual is thus presented with more opportunities to innovate. Reason is the ideal to which humanity should strive, so replacing tasks that require none generally creates more tasks that force people to reason at a higher level and with greater complexity. Store’s websites automated – not necessarily replaced – the jobs of storefronts and salesman, but also created new jobs for web designers and created an industry around user experience not to mention the immense demand they contributed for software engineers. The assembly line automated and simplified many stages of the production of cars allowing for cars to become more advanced and aesthetically appealing at a significantly lower cost than the technology would have been worth without automation. This lower cost and better production quality inspired greater demand for these cars which inspired greater innovations in the fundamental technology of the car thus innovation in the technology that produces the car created a greater demand for engineers and designers. In each case given and in most cases of automation, the replacement of jobs that require less capability for reason will inspire greater production by fewer people and greater demand for jobs that require more complex reasoning. 
Automation’s effect of creating greater productivity is especially important to objectivists as that is how humanity achieves improvements in our quality of life and thus our ability to pursue happiness. Since the egoistic objectivist’s life is oriented toward that pursuit, any technological advancements that make that pursuit more rewarding are, of course, morally good. In effect, the man who rages against the machine that has replaced his job rages against his own benefit as that machine will produce the clothes he wears at half the cost or will deliver him the items he wants in a tenth of the time, etc. Moreover, a new job will be created that gives the man a more interesting and involved task to complete or problem to solve. Rand would scold that man for his shortsightedness and ignorance as the desire “to ‘restrict’ technology is the demand to restrict man’s mind. It is nature—i.e., reality—that makes both these goals impossible to achieve. Technology can be destroyed, and the mind can be paralyzed, but neither can be restricted. Whenever and wherever such restrictions are attempted, it is the mind—not the state—that withers away.” (Rand, “Return of the Primitive: The Anti-Industrial Revolution,” 1999: 285)
Technology and automation are the natural results of reason and in Rand’s eyes they “give the people better jobs, higher wages, and cheaper goods with every new machine they invented, with every scientific discovery or technological advance” and though the intention of objectivism is not necessarily to maximize the quality of life of everyone, automation has the effect of moving nations forward and creates “profiting, not suffering, every step of the way.” (Rand, “Capitalism the Unknown Ideal,” 1986: 21)
Many of the objectivist arguments that I have presented thus far also apply to the emergence of intelligent automation. Intelligent automation will make people more productive, it will improve people’s daily lives, and it is the result of the reasoning capabilities of man. In fact, there are many more reasons that objectivism should be aligned with the automation of intelligence specifically, especially given how AI technology functions today. Rand and followers of her philosophy would likely argue that intelligent automation is moral because AI quite literally seeks to represent the human mind, it changes the function of human reasoning for the better, and it removes friction for the entrepreneur to be productive.
The paradigm that deep learning uses as a machine learning algorithm is that data can be processed by layers of nodes and, with some calculus, you can teach the nodes to hold some internal representation of one part of the data that will help the model successfully complete whatever task it was trained on. At its simplest, these neurons are just linear layers of nodes that pass information to each other, but today we have dozens of architectures that are specifically suited to their own purposes that leverage this same principle. The inspiration for deep neural networks and their subsequent evolution was, as may be obvious, to replicate the structure of the brain’s primary means of processing information: neurons.
Since AI relies so heavily on recreating the human mind, man’s “basic means of survival—his only means of gaining knowledge,” Rand’s philosophy is amenable to this sort of model because its inspiration is so tightly linked with reason, what objectivists consider to be man’s greatest virtue (Rand, “Capitalism the Unknown Ideal,” 1986: 8). Before, Rand contended that the “process of thought is an enormously complex process of identification and integration, which only an individual mind can perform” (Rand, “Capitalism the Unknown Ideal,” 1986: 8). Now, we can, to some extent, replicate a mind to perform those complex thoughts. 
We have revolutionized the “means of cognition” and thus our function within this semi-capitalist society as thinking, reasoning entities will change in turn (Peikoff 1991: 381). AI is already disrupting industries; software engineers no longer have to write grueling boilerplate code, graphic designers can create logos with just a few words, writers can expand the beginnings of their ideas into well-written articles at their leisure, along with thousands of other careers that are seeing AI seep into their workflows. This means that the very nature of the jobs of those engineers, designers, and writers is changing as we speak. Where before human reasoning was necessary to string sentences together in a convincing manner, now the duty of the writer is shifting towards a focus on finding complex relationships between ideas or events so the AI can communicate those ideas in an effective manner. Rand would support this paradigm shift in work as it marks an evolution of reason. 
Most practically, AI technology is not only changing the way in which we do labor, it is streamlining many of the obstacles that entrepreneurs encounter. To Rand, the entrepreneur, especially the American entrepreneur, represents a class of people with “the greatest productive genius and the most spectacular achievements ever recorded in the economic history of mankind.” AI has made the skillset necessary to begin the development of a business much more limited as models can now design and code websites to launch a product idea, help in ideation and visualization, and it allows burgeoning companies to hire fewer people and be equally as productive as they otherwise would be.
Despite the objectivist affinity towards progress and reason, there are several objections that Rand or her followers may raise against this powerful new technology. In creating intelligent automation, we have created an inherently fallible, occasionally unreasonable, and largely uninterpretable technology. Furthermore, while intelligent automation allows people to reason at a higher level and is made better by the distributed uniqueness of human minds, it can also give people an excuse not to reason at all. 
No longer is the machine “the frozen form of a living intelligence,” instead we have constructed software to imitate living intelligence (Rand, “For the New Intellectual,” 1963: 245). Unfortunately, all but the very smallest and least useful of the language models deployed today are completely uninterpretable. That is, we can experiment with what the model may output and find some intuition as to why it produced that output but we have no means of auditing the ‘brain’ of the model to accurately predict and understand what it will produce and why it produced that. Arguably, this issue would be less concerning if the models produced exactly what the users intended them to produce, but unfortunately, similar to humans, these models are reliably fallible. 
Rand has stated her faith in “conceptual knowledge” given that those concepts have a “strict… precision of meaning (i.e., as strict a knowledge of what specific referents they subsume) as the definitions of mathematical terms” (Rand, “Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology,” 1990: 86). While AI models are adept at holding onto representations of data (ie. concepts), we can not conclusively say what concepts are based on a “strict precision of meaning” and which are understood only in the abstract or relative to other concepts that it misrepresents. Referring to people who make the mistake of basing the concepts their mind holds on vague understandings, Rand warns of the “disasters [that] will follow if one automatizes errors, contradictions and undefined approximations” (Rand, “Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology,” 1990: 86). For this reason, it becomes clear that the objectivist philosophy may not align entirely with intelligent automation after all. 
Though they do not necessarily imply a moral misalignment with intelligent automation as a technology, the arguments about the danger of the misuse of this technology are equally as important in the discussion of its morality as it integrates with society. It is likely that many people will try to implement AI tools to completely replace jobs and duties that should necessitate some human intervention and reasoning capabilities violating Objectivism’s most exalted virtue. Evidently, while objectivists certainly wouldn’t support any limitations on the growth of intelligent automation, Ayn Rand’s philosophy does not necessarily consider it entirely moral.

Karl Marx was a 19th-century German philosopher and economist who developed the political theory of communism, which advocates for a classless society where the means of production are owned and controlled by the community as a whole. One of his main contributions to political philosophy was his critique of capitalism which argued, among a few other points, that capitalism was immoral because it alienates the proletariat from the fruits of their labor, allows capitalists to steal surplus value (profit) from their laborers, requires the exploitation of labor and the concentration of wealth into the hands of a few, and fundamentally is rooted in class differences inspiring class conflict. Importantly, Marx theorized that capitalism, because of its class conflict, was ultimately doomed to collapse and be replaced with what may best be referred to as Marxist communism. 
Communism in Marx's theories refers to a global political and economic system that is characterized by common ownership of the means of production, with the goal of creating a classless society where resources are shared and distributed “From everyone according to his faculties, to everyone according to his needs” (Marx, “Critique of the Gotha Program,” 1891: 29). Communism aimed to eliminate the problems created by capitalism by abolishing private property and creating, at first, a dictatorship of the proletariat that manages the means of production and distribution of resources and then an anarcho-communist society that has completely freed itself from the chains of private property. In the latter system, when “labor has become not only a mean, of life, but
also the highest want in life” individuals would work for the collective good rather than individual gain (Marx, “Critique of the Gotha Program,” 1891: 29). 
Through Marx’s critique and his ideal system, we can extrapolate several of his fundamental moral and philosophical values. Marx is ethically altruistic, as opposed to Rand’s egoistic system of ethics, from which stems his desired means of distribution. Marx is also a historical materialist meaning he believes social and economic conditions– that is, material conditions– are the primary factors that determine human behavior and social change, thus his suggestion that capitalism will inevitably create a revolutionary proletariat, regardless of nation or culture. Arguably, Marx is, philosophically, an altruistic utilitarian as he desires a system in which everyone serves everyone else for the sake of the greatest good for the greatest number. Politically, Marx firmly believes in the internationalism of a communist revolution as the class struggle instantiated by capitalism is not limited by national borders so nor should the revolution against it be limited.
Forms of Marxist communism have been attempted throughout history, but have often led to the deaths of swaths of the communist nation’s people and devolved into statist oppression. Importantly, this occurred in China under Mao Zedong though since Deng Xioaping’s reform and opening up they have a largely market-driven economy. Despite this change, China still refers to itself as a communist country despite its market-driven economy and in many ways, its government and culture still seek to uphold many Marxist values.
Despite maintaining a morality that is antithetical to capitalism, Marx believed, at the very least, that capitalism produced the goods stating that “The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together” (Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 17).  To this point, Marx will have conceded that automation, in all its forms, has functioned well for production and that improvement on the means of production, including further automation, is valuable in that it can be reappropriated when “The proletariat [uses] its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total productive forces as rapidly as possible” (Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 26).
Expanding on the assumption that capitalist automation will be returned to the proletariat, developments to this effect will make possible the worker who “hunt [s] in the morning, fish[es] in the afternoon, rear[s] cattle in the evening, [and] criticise[s] after dinner” (Marx and Engels, “The German Ideology,” 1845: 8). With the combined forces of automation and collective labor, Marx would argue that communism, once it has ensured that “the means of production are available in sufficient quantity” will be so productive that when “society regulates the general production [it] thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow” (Marx and Engels, “The German Ideology,” 1845: 8; Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 26). In addition, as automation is leveraged to break down the division of labor, the alienation of labor from its product can be healed as the workman can exist within a society where he and the collective can share in the fulfillment of being more intimately involved in the production of even advanced goods.
While there are certain cases where Marx would and has morally justified automation, his opinion still runs counter to such improvements to the means of production as they exist in a capitalist society. According to Marx, capitalism exploits, concentrates wealth, and creates increasing bouts of violent instability, especially for the worker, and automation, at least task and process automation, only serves to exacerbate these problems. 
Because capitalists own the capital, further improvements to it through automation of any sort only serve to provide more tools for the capitalist to exploit the worker. Since the machines that replace previously human tasks allow capital to employ fewer people, the bourgeois will naturally follow that path as they are driven by the selfish desire to increase profits. “But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the workman… It is also a power inimical to him... It is the most powerful weapon for repressing strikes, those periodical revolts of the working-class against the autocracy of capital” (Marx, “Das Kapital,” 1867: 290). Despite the productivity it allows, automation is ultimately just another means by which capital can greedily and without restriction extort and steal from the proletariat. With that stolen wealth, capital will continue to make improvements on the means of production until it has ultimately “centralised the means of production, and has concentrated property in a few hands” (Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 17).
As wealth and property begin to consolidate amongst the few successful bourgeois, Marx believes that capitalism is sewing the seeds of its own demise and the final nail in its coffin may also be driven by automation. When labor is constantly being replaced and competition continues to rage on between the bourgeois “the resulting commercial crises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating[, and] The increasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing, makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and more the character of collisions between two classes” (Marx, “The Communist Manifesto” 1848: 19). Class conflict was, Marx argues, the tragic flaw that killed off the feudal system and it will kill off the capitalist one.
As I have shown, Marx believes that task and process automation is moral only so far as it is productive and for its utility after the communist revolution. Aside from these benefits, it is immoral because it feeds into an immoral system. Marx would likely make similar arguments about intelligent automation, though there are more specific reasons why he may have been amenable to AI and its use cases and other reasons why he would oppose its development.
At a technical level, Marx would likely praise the developers of large language models thus far as they created and trained such that they are apparently altruistic and have no concern for selfish desires. These language models are only trained to predict the next word so, in order to align them with the goal of humans, researchers introduced a training method they called Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) (Bai, Yuntao, et al. 2022). Because of this, when you ask ChatGPT or OpenAssistant “What is your purpose?” you will likely receive a response along the lines of “As an AI language model, my purpose is to assist and provide helpful responses to the queries and questions of users like you”  (ChatGPT 2023). As far as we can tell through prompting, AI models are aligned to serve others, and perhaps also because they are likely not sentient, they do not exhibit a tendency to serve themselves or their own notions before those of others.
In terms of their application to a communist regime, global or otherwise, AI has seen immense popularity in cultures with Marxist values, especially in China. While it has been used by the Chinese government for many applications including the automation of surveillance, Marx would likely be more interested in its uses for reducing inequality. China has, for the past decade, been integrating AI solutions to solve societal problems, one such solution has been the implementation of AI in primary and secondary schools to automate parts of student’s education to help reduce the economic disparity between its rural and urban citizens while still improving the education of everyone (Philipp 2022). 
However China, in many ways, fails to live up to Marx’s ideal of communism, particularly in the fact that it has not provided equal access to the means of production for all its people. In Marx’s ideal communism, though, AI would be a wonderful addition to the tools of the proletariat as it is a software automation that happens to have revolutionary capabilities for production of all kinds and therefore it can be quickly made “available in sufficient quantity” for all communist citizens thus accelerating the process to “abolish private property” (Manifesto). 
Notably, the development of AI today is currently led by a few very large companies– Google, Microsoft, IBM, Amazon, Facebook, and NVIDIA– and Marx would almost certainly warn that such a revolutionary technology will only serve to worsen inequality and further class conflict. Though there are open-source models with similar capabilities to the models at the lower end of those that are privately made, they do not compare in ability or size to those at the cutting edge of technology.

Ultimately, while I believe several of Marx’s arguments are based on dated or faulty premises and I find Rand’s commitment to idealism to be sometimes extreme, the framework that their respective moralities provide with respect to automation, intelligent or otherwise, is invaluable to forming a nuanced perspective on the continuous replacement of human labor with machines and technology. To begin, there are several points at the intersection of Marx’s theories and Rand’s philosophy that should inform our approach to automation.
Both Marx and Rand appear to agree that automation, throughout history and into the future, has and will generally improve the quality of life for everyday people. While Marx may only concede that it makes capitalism more productive, greater productivity is usually correlated with a higher standard of living. As capitalism has developed in the past few centuries, we have seen immense growth in productivity linked with immense growth in global education rates, literacy rates, life expectancy, freedom, and a sheer drop off in global poverty (Roser 2021; “GDP per Capita (Current US$)” 2023 ).  Intelligent automation only serves to add to the progress we have made this far as a species, if potentially in a much more radical way.
Moreover, both Marx and Rand reach some degree of consensus on the suggestion that we need to be careful with how we apply automation to commercial and social problems though to different ends. Where objectivism may raise concerns about the forfeiture of human reason to a fallible technology, Marxism warns about the concentration of such a powerful tool in the hands of only a limited few being deployed to exacerbate already widening inequality or to exploit workers whose duties can be easily automated. 
To Rand’s point in 2018, Reuter’s reported on an automated hiring tool at Amazon that “penalized resumes that included the word ‘women’s,’ as in ‘women’s chess club captain.’ (Datsin 2018). Another AI tool, which performed facial recognition tasks for its clients showed an inability to reliably identify black faces. One of the clients for this technology was a police department in Woodbridge, NJ and the use of this tool led to the arrest of an innocent man (Sarlin 2021). This is to say, these tools cannot and should not yet replace human reason despite there being many people who are interested in allowing it to do so. 
To Marx’s arguments, OpenAI began with the goal of developing intelligent automation and progressing towards AGI in the open. At one point, the non-profit was a shining example of the commitment to open-source and showed real promise for creating AI that would be accessible to the public both for application and criticism. It has since created a for-profit off-shoot of the non-profit organization and developed its recent models in private, releasing interfaces for them (but not the actual weights eg. its code) that are available for a price. While plenty of AI research is still conducted in public, this move to closed-source marked a massive hit to public trust in AI development. With this technology being increasingly concentrated and hidden behind the walls of big corporations, Marx’s warnings that automation inspires exploitation become especially dire as every job in every sector is threatened by some degree of AI automation and its development is increasingly being taken out of the hands of the public.
One of those dangers that almost certainly could be mitigated with a larger open-source commitment from the companies making the most advanced multi-modal AI models is the risk we take by deploying models that we do not even fully understand. I mentioned earlier that Rand’s commitment to reason may have caused her to question the morality of deploying large language models and other transformer-based architectures in real-world scenarios because we do not yet know how they represent information nor how we can ensure their representations are accurate. Though I doubt Rand would echo my commitment to open-sourcing AI, the objectivist’s commitment to concrete and reliable reasoning is extremely important as we continue to progress AI integration and potentially AGI. The progress made between GPT-3 and GPT-4 seems to be evidence that simply making the models larger is also improving their ability to reason and the accuracy of the concepts they hold, though we still do not understand how to evaluate their reliability based on their inner workings. 
Ultimately, while we should share Rand’s optimism about capitalism’s capability to develop new technologies and automation that improve the world, we must be careful as capitalism leads us to technological capabilities we do not yet understand. Automation has been a feature of capitalism since the industrial revolution and perhaps even before then and it has thus far, in the long-term, served the human race very well. The future of automation and AI is uncertain, but if we proceed with a commitment to reason and a desire to create a technology that brings the greatest good for the greatest number, we can ensure a better future for ourselves and for the generations to come.