Star Wars: A New Hope, the origin of a fictional galaxy more culturally impactful and narratively dense than anyone could have ever predicted, remains as timeless and entertaining as it ever was. It tows the fine line between whimsically grand, foolishly insightful, pleasantly poignant, and as it was described after its premiere, it's just “fun and funny” (Canby, 1977). Inspired to create a modern mythology by the likes of Joseph Campbell, George Lucas has achieved his goal and simultaneously created a cinematic masterpiece that stands a head higher than its peers from Hollywood’s second golden age, beating out esteemed titles like Alien and Rocky at the very least in terms of its enduring relevance (Moyers, 1999).
The plot itself is simple and, in many ways, familiar. A rebellion has formed to combat the evil Empire that has seized control over the galaxy. A princess is captured by this evil force and tormented by a maleficent sorcerer. A young man on a far away planet, our hero, hears the call to action of a damsel in distress and embarks on a journey to save her. Along the way, he learns more about himself taking several steps towards his great potential, and ultimately, our hero rescues the princess and leads the rebel forces to their greatest victory over the tyrants. The wicked sorcerer is cast away to torment the galaxy another day.
It's a tale as old as time, drawing from Arthurian mythology, and the many greek myths of father-son strife (Zeus and Cronos, Cronos and Uranus, Oedipus Rex, etc.), yet in many ways, it adds a depth that can only be represented on screen. Lucas begins his story with the capture and massacre of a rebel ship. Through a very direct use of color, scale, and costume we see a sterile, achromatic, faceless (and quite obviously evil) imperial force commandeer a small rebel spaceship by forcibly docking them onto a comparably gargantuan battleship. With the aim of conveying a simple yet meaningful story, it is apparent that Lucas sacrifices any subtlety in favor of digestibility. Though in another film blatant and overt symbolism could at times become overbearing, the beautiful simplicity of the story Lucas is trying to tell ultimately pairs well with his conspicuous use of visual characterizations. 
A story cannot shine without its characters, and the cast of A New Hope beams almost brighter than the story itself. In part due to the phenomenal portrayals by their actors and in part due to their relationships with the plot, every significant character, hero or villain, added to the emotional and thematic complexity of the film. As played by Alec Guinness, Obi Wan Kenobi, a wise old man and wielder of a universal power known as the Force, is the soul of the film. He guides its moral compass with his abstract axioms and ensures that the viewer does not get lost in the spectacle on screen but sees the story’s more meaningful messages. Though mysterious and conservative with what he does and does not say, his presence implies a greater power in the Star Wars universe that gives the heroes a sense of a divine purpose.
Luke Skywalker, played by Mark Hamill, makes for the perfect simple hero of a perfectly simple story. He’s young, innocent, and hopeful to a fault. Hamill superbly conveys the balance between naivety and heroism in his character especially through his tumultuous relationship with Harrison Ford’s character, Han Solo.
Han is our glimpse into the everyday humanoid of the Star Wars galaxy. Less focused on the conflict between good and evil, his character judges the moral questions that face him by how they do or do not affect his proverbial wallet. As a foil to Luke, Han diverges from Luke’s standard heroism in his lack of principles, arrogance, and jaded outlook. With undeniable charisma, Ford manages to bring out the cast's chemistry with his every scene, especially among the leading trio — Luke, Leia, and the snarky pilot himself. His humor, unlike that of today’s soulless Marvel formula, always seems to land without devaluing the impactful moments of the film. As Canby describes, Lucas (especially through Ford’s performance) “is able to recall the tackiness of the old comic strips and serials he loves without making a movie that is, itself, tacky.” 
Princess Leia is far from your typical damsel in distress. Carry Fisher plays her with a striking stoicism. As a powerful political advocate for freedom, Leia is comfortable under duress and she displays the capability to be insolent in the face of great torment and coercion. To the viewer, she represents the rebellion’s steadfast opposition to tyranny with great pride and to great effect.
The iconic and terrifying Darth Vader makes an unforgettable impression on the viewer from the first time we hear the ominous breath of James Earl Jones, Vader’s voice-actor in the film. Though he is shown to be commanding and imposing in many scenes, I could not help but feel a little underwhelmed with his intimidation factor in this film. His power is often overcome and we never see the extent of his hatred represented in its entirety.
The android comic relief duo of C3PO, a golden humanoid service-bot, and R2-D2, a cylindrical, dalek shaped unit without the capability of biological language, described by contemporary reviewers as “the year's best new comedy team,” provide a unique representation of a potential robot human relationship (Canby, 1977). Treated as second class citizens of the galaxy by almost every lifeform (with the exception of Luke and Obi-Wan), robots are portrayed as both benevolent and subservient. Since Lucas gives them agency and their own personalities, the presence of R2 and C3PO conjures in the viewer’s mind many questions of the ethical treatment of sentient machines and allows for a character’s relationship to androids to define their moral integrity. 
Apart from its characters, the film managed to dazzle with many of the original special effects that hold up even to the standards of today, and rightly so. As said by a reviewer in 1999 in a way that maintains its validity, A New Hope “focused the industry on big-budget special-effects blockbusters, blasting off a trend we are still living through” (Ebert, 1999). As the origin of the now commonplace action packed cinematic spectacle it is only natural that the immense imposing imperial battleships are still menacing, the robots are still convincing, the sets are as immersive as ever, and space appears as vast and awe-inspiring as it does in modern films. Unfortunately, since I watched the remastered edition, I could feel the age of 1990’s CGI. Though contemporary critics considered the additions to be “well done”, given the huge improvements we’ve seen to CGI technology the attempts to subtly insert new alien creatures appear consistently uncanny and out of place, briefly stripping away the immersion that the film had thus far worked so diligently to create (Ebert, 1977). One scene with a CGI Jabba the Hutt added in post-production was discernibly awkward especially as Han’s body glitched up and down around Jabba’s ill-constructed tail. Notably, at the end of that scene Han exited wishing the slug-like creature goodbye by saying “Jabba, you’re a wonderful human being.” Perhaps it was a sarcastic jab at the Hut, but the poor handling of Jabba’s CGI introduction made it appear to be more of a clumsy editing mistake. 
Even against the surprisingly good original special effects and the potent chemistry between the cast, it is the work of the movie’s composer, John Williams, that defines the greatness of this film. Without overshadowing what we see on screen, Williams single-handedly controls how the viewer experiences the film. In the film’s final battle against the Death Star, Williams quietly but effectively manipulates the movie’s theme song to at first build anticipation, then create a sense of ominous concern, and then throughout the fight, to highlight each moment of its emotional rollercoaster. When an enemy fighter ship tailing Luke’s X-wing gets shot down by one of the other rebel fighters, rather than allow us some brief relief, Williams switches to a more urgent and stressful melody so as to say that the fight has only just begun. In every moment, Williams has control over the audience's emotions, adding an immeasurable layer of emotional depth to the impact of the film.
While William’s control of the film's pathos is exemplary, the way in which he represents and ultimately defines many of Lucas’s core themes is perhaps even more impressive. Hope, duty, innocence, good, and evil are all given their own melodies, each more magnificent than the last. Moreover, he manipulates, mixes, and matches these themes so effortlessly that they can be used to evoke many feelings in the listener, often at the same time. 
Two scenes in particular stand out for their profound musicality and their iconic melodies, respectively. The first sees Luke bathed in the oranges and reds looking towards two suns setting over the desert planet’s horizon. Paired with the aesthetic beauty of this binary sunset, a horn plays timidly gradually approaching a crescendo as Luke approaches his perch then, as if heralded in by the Force itself, the eruption of a string orchestra passionately plays a grand and bittersweet rendition Williams’s melody for duty creating an awe-inspiring moment representing Luke’s decision to answer his call to action. The second occurs not long after the first when Luke and Obi-Wan Kenobi enter a rough bar in Mos Eisley, a space port where, according to Obi-Wan, “you will never find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy.” Upon entering, we are shown a menagerie of aliens from the serpentine to the vaguely werewolf, all with a dangerous gleam of violent volatility in their eyes. To accompany such a scene of “scum and villainy,” Williams presents us with what has since become one of his most iconic works, an infectious swing jazz tune played expertly by a band of bobbing aliens with bulbous white heads. This scene speaks not only to the expertise of Williams as a composer, but in the canon, to the cultural depth of the galaxy Lucas has constructed.
This first installment in the Star Wars saga flows fluidly through its plot, allowing us to breathe in its most impactful developments. That is, until the transition between the penultimate and the ultimate act of the film. In introducing the characters, the galaxy, and the dynamism of its inhabitants, Lucas seems to fit every necessary and substantial detail comfortably into the opening forty minutes or so. After we have met every character and established their motivations, the plot points begin to unfold in a cohesive and satisfying manner. However, in the final thirty minutes we are left gasping for air as the plot rushes to its finale. After the film’s goal, as dictated at the start of the movie, has been accomplished and it feels as though we have reached its climax, Lucas insists on drawing it out to a more grand conclusion. Luke transitions from our young and inexperienced hero to battle-ready soldier in a matter of minutes and characters we meet only briefly are killed off just moments later giving what should be meaningful sacrifices a sense of insignificance. Though Lucas’s grand finale was well worth the haste (especially considering Williams’s contribution to its grandeur), I only wish he did not have to artificially accelerate the film’s pacing to get there.  
To no fault of its own, Star Wars: Episode IV suffers somewhat from the inconsistencies  made through the decisions of future movies. Most glaring is the incestuous implications of romantic tension between Luke and Leia who are in future films revealed not only to be siblings but twins. Moreover, Obi-Wan should recognize R2-D2 and C3PO from the prequel trilogy and the more recent Obi-Wan Kenobi series somewhat contradicts the relationship between Leia and the titular jedi we see in A New Hope and has many other noticeable consequences with regard to the consistency of several of Guinness’s lines. To fault the film itself, Obi Wan references the aptitude of imperial stormtroopers with a blaster only for every one of their many blasts to miss the main characters horrendously. Perhaps this is nitpicky, but their aim is so bad that what should be a serious line reads, in retrospect, as comedic.
Star Wars: Episode IV was the genesis of a new generation of films and the origin of what is now a prolific and monumental franchise. More than anything, this film is an embodiment of the titular theme — hope. In this tale from a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away, I can only wish that future viewers for years to come derive from this film, as I did, an enduring sense of that nagging and unwavering feeling. The dream of an infinite potential for good to conquer evil; the dream of a future that is better than today; the dream that there will always be A New Hope.   