This essay is an examination of the state of systemic racism in modern America through the analysis of distant and recent history complemented by an analysis of this nation’s current condition. The paper is divided into two main topics: housing and education. Housing itself contains various subsections the first being history, including a piece on what the ‘40 acres and a mule’ policy was and how it set a precedent for ineffective housing policies, along with a piece on the ways in which 2008 financial crisis particularly damaged the African American community. Second, the current state of discriminatory housing is evaluated with the conclusion that homebuying, and acquiring related loans, is more difficult for black people. Thirdly, discriminatory educational funding is revealed. Criminal justice is similarly broken up with first a section on history, involving the effects of President Nixon's racist intentions in starting the War on Drugs, and second, a section on how the modern criminal justice system discriminates which is further separated into three topics: policing, prosecution and representation, and post-incarceration. The basic findings being that black people and their neighborhoods are over-policed, prosecutors tend to be more harsh to and suspicious of African-Americans, many black people are subjected to the inadequate counsel provided by a failing public defender system, and with the United States’ high rates incarceration especially that of black people, African Americans have seen a trend of mass disenfranchisement and significantly lower quality of lifestyle.
Systematic, or systemic, racism is the presence of prejudicial disadvantage directed at a group in various social or political institutions. The focus here on African Americans as said group. For example, for every one hundred dollars earned by a white family, black families make just $57.30, and while representing just thirteen percent of the actual United States population, black people compile around 40% of the incarcerated population ("7 Ways," n.d.). The existence of systematic racism, even when presented simply in face-value statistics, is difficult to objectively refute, though, with the recent rise in outspoken white supremacists, its existence has been called into question by certain groups. Often, in order to support racist idealisms on the internet, misleading or untrue statistics are used to defame the African American race especially one stating that ‘despite making up just 13 percent of the population, blacks commit roughly half of the violent crimes in the United States.’ In reality, the greatest predictor for murder is wealth inequality, highlighting race inequity as the driving issue behind systematic racism. Additionally, while 36% of murders are committed by African Americans, 32% of murder victims are black (Szalavitz, 2018; Homicide, 2017). Systematic racism is, in large part, related to the disparate distribution of disadvantage and privilege between racial groups. As anti-racism activist Timothy Wise said, “Genealogy itself is something of a privilege, coming far more easily to those of us for whom enslavement, conquest, and dispossession of our land has not been our lot” (2004). African Americans, generally speaking, are subject to a distinct lack of privilege and, furthermore, experience impairment from various institutions that actively work to their detriment. Though some may believe that modern American racism has little to no strength to affect the lives of individuals, in fact, millions of African-Americans face prejudice in all facets of life, stemming particularly from an inherently flawed approach to housing and a discriminatory criminal justice system. 

‘40 acres and a mule,’ as the order has come to be known, had the potential to mark the beginning of a new progressive era for black housing, but ultimately, perpetuated America’s long-standing precedent of denying African Americans equal opportunity. General William T. Sherman of the Union army issued an order on January 16, 1865, prescribing that 400,000 acres of ex-confederate land be to be divided such that “each family shall have a plot of not more than 40 acres of tillable ground, and when it borders on some water channel, with not more than 800 feet waterfront” (Gates, n.d.). Before this Sherman had conferred with black abolitionist leaders who had seen the opportunity to “to break the back of Southern slaveholders’ power” by creating a black settlement along “a strip of coastline stretching from Charleston, South Carolina, to the St. John’s River in Florida, including Georgia’s Sea Islands and the mainland thirty miles in from the coast” (Gates, n.d.). It was one of the first occasions where the black people of America were actually to be represented by the government upon their explicit request though the end result would undo any advancement that may have been made. It was later ordered by Sherman that the army should give the settlers a mule and thus the phrase “40 acres and a mule” was created. Unfortunately, the order was subsequently scrapped by Andrew Johnson in the fall of 1865, and the land was returned to the southern planters from which it was taken as a show of sympathy to those who had opposed the union of the United States. Thus, the well being of whites was again prioritized at the expense of black Americans maintaining a trend that would echo well into the future.
The 2008 financial crisis reaped economic disaster and foreclosure through the homes of millions, but African Americans took the most devastating blow. Vanessa Bulnes, a black woman who ran an in-home day-care-center, bought her humble two-bedroom home on a predominantly black street in 1992 where she lived contented for 16 years. Her husband suffered a stroke in 2008 and the pair began to fall behind on their mortgage payments. After a fight to refinance the loan, they were forced to move into a rental home in 2012. Between 2006 and 2012 at least 35 properties were foreclosed on their street (McMullen, 2019). Theirs is the story of thousands of African-Americans struggling to make ends meet, hit hard by the nationwide spike in foreclosure rates. To understand the ubiquity of this story, it is important to note that as of 2017, the refinancing market saw “blacks rejected on 39 percent of their applications and whites on 22.9 percent” (McMullen, 2019). The financial crisis caused about “8 percent of black homeowners [to lose] their homes to foreclosure from 2007 to 2009;” double the rate for white homeowners (McMullen, 2019). The devastation of the crash and its origins were not limited to only poor or impoverished African Americans either; “In 2006, amid the real estate run-up, black families earning more than $200,000 annually were more likely on average to be given a subprime loan than a white family making $30,000 a year” (McMullen, 2019). In this, the sheer extent to which prejudice was rooted in the banks is displayed. In fact, “blacks were more than twice as likely to receive a subprime loan than white applicants” (McMullen, 2019). The wealth and prosperity of thousands of African Americans who had worked, despite bias and discriminatory opposition, to gain their wealth was severely hurt in the financial crisis so much so that “the median net worth of white families today [is] at nearly 10 times that of black families” (McMullen, 2019). The prosperity of African American homeowners has fluctuated in recent years, yet since the financial crisis, there has been a notable downturn “erasing all of the gains made since the passage of the Fair Housing Act in 1968, landmark legislation outlawing housing discrimination” (McMullen, 2019).
 African Americans have been prejudiced against, not only by the banks but by the very people who want to sell houses. The recent reductions in black homeownership come at a time of relative prosperity in America, with the economy growing in strength and a record low unemployment rate, but somehow African Americans have not been able to experience much of this progress. The dated and usually racist phrase, ‘there goes the neighborhood,’ from the mid 20th century refers to the negative impact that change, in many cases, the arrival of a black neighbor, can have on a neighborhood. Despite the apparent progression of American society, the essence of this phrase seems to remain true in the eyes of some real estate agents. The National Fair Housing Alliance did a significant study in various locations finding that their African American testers who masqueraded as home buyers “were often denied information about special incentives that would have made the purchase easier, and were required to produce loan preapproval letters and other documents” (McMullen, 2019). Unsurprisingly, their white counterparts faced no such obstacles. 
Today, banks continue to enforce their prejudices; no longer by distributing subprime loans to black people, but by making it more difficult for African Americans to secure loans. 2017 saw that “19.3 percent of black applicants were denied a conventional home loan, compared with 7.9 percent for whites” (McMullen, 2019). This could be contributed to a higher rate of low credit among minorities, simply indicating a wealth gap between African Americans and whites. However, Antoine Thompson, executive director of the National Association of Real Estate Brokers, argues to the contrary. He stated that “In some cases, even when blacks have higher credit scores, they were often offered worse financing terms than less-qualified whites… [and] it’s hard to argue that bias isn’t a factor” (McMullen, 2019). Though there are legal restrictions on discrimination in home buying, it evidently squirms its way into the cracks and crevises provided by the law.
Despite the various laws and legal cases deeming it illegal and unjust, it is strikingly evident that segregation persists and thus many schools are able to be put into the category of either ‘white’ or ‘non-white.’ Notwithstanding the issue of legal segregation, the distinction has allowed for discriminatory funding in education throughout the country consequently creating separate and unequal learning environments. From a broad perspective on the state of discriminatory funding, “nonwhite school districts receive $23 billion less than white districts, despite serving the same number of students” (Gunn, 2019). Though one could relate this to the general complications of the funding of public schools in low-income areas, this is not actually the case. For instance, while in both cases the schools receive less funding than the more affluent white districts, “high-poverty white districts receive approximately $1,500 more per student than high-poverty non-white districts,” amounting to huge disparities in overall funding (Gunn, 2019). Current legislation and legal action have been unable to prevent this disproportionate funding. Curiously, a number of states that have had funding-lawsuits successfully filed against them maintain some of the worst distributions of money in the education system. 
In New Jersey, for example, where courts forced the state to award more funding to poor, urban districts, there's a whopping $7,300 per-student funding gap between poor white and poor non-white districts. In California and New York, both sites of lengthy school finance litigation, gaps between poor white and non-white districts are approximately $4,000 per student. (Gunn, 2019)
If change through the courts has been ineffective and even counterproductive, actual reform necessitates a change in the flawed legislation itself not only in its interpretation and execution.

On June 17th, 1971 President Nixon named drug abuse as “public enemy number one” and thus initiated a dangerously counter-intuitive and outwardly racist campaign that haunts black America to this very day. The next year, the Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement (ODALE) was created to uphold Nixon’s policy, and the following year, ODALE and various other agencies were combined to create the overarching Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) (Perry, 2018). These agencies were apparently well-intentioned, but their actual purpose was resoundingly regressive for race relations. John Eldrichman, Nixon’s assistant for domestic affairs and co-conspirator in Watergate, confessed to the biased origins of the War on Drugs:
The Nixon campaign in 1968, and the Nixon White House after that, had two enemies: the antiwar left and black people. You understand what I’m saying? We knew we couldn’t make it illegal to be either against the war or blacks, but by getting the public to associate the hippies with marijuana and blacks with heroin, and then criminalizing both heavily, we could disrupt those communities. We could arrest their leaders, raid their homes, break up their meetings, and vilify them night after night on the evening news. Did we know we were lying about the drugs? Of course we did. (Perry, 2018)
Richard Nixon was more than successful in his attack against his political opponents. Incarceration rates skyrocketed from around 200 males per 100,000 to about 400 by 1986 then to 956 by 2008 and the black community was the primary target (Perry, 2018). The damages done by the Nixon administration still echo through the United States today.
In every aspect of criminal justice in America, the plague of racism persists. Black people see significantly more difficulties than whites beginning in policing, moving to sentencing and representation, incarceration, then ending in life post-incarceration. 
The consistent correlation between African-Americans and incarceration or arrest can be misconstrued as a relationship between being black and committing crimes, however, many of these crimes can be attributed to over-policing or prejudiced policing. Law enforcement has been found to be consistently biased against African-Americans to the point where “[m]ore than half of all young black Americans know someone, including themselves, who has been harassed by the police” ("7 Ways," n.d.). Discrimination is found to be especially glaring in the enforcement of drug laws as an ongoing consequence of the aforementioned War on Drugs. While not using or abusing significantly more or significantly fewer drugs than white people, “more than one in four people arrested for drug law violations in 2015 was black” ("7 Ways," n.d.). Again, African Americans comprise only thirteen percent of the United States’ population, so the greater drug arrest rates indicate a particular police presence in black communities or excessive focus on black civilians. Moreover, it was found that African Americans were “3.7 times more likely to be arrested for marijuana possession than whites in 2010” despite actual marijuana usage being almost equal between each race (Report to the United, 2018). Throughout the country, it is a general trend that police will pull over African Americans at a higher rate than white people or even Hispanics. Having been pulled over, “black and Hispanic drivers were three times as likely as whites to be searched (6% and 7% versus 2%[, respectively])” despite a higher rate at which contraband is found, relative to the number of times white people are pulled over, as opposed to black people (Report to the United, 2018). Evidently, the way in which America polices its neighborhoods and roads is corrupted with racism, but the discrimination continues as African Americans are irresponsibly forced through the justice system.
Prosecution and representation have become prejudiced and ineffective when black people attempt to plea their innocence in a court where they are often found guilty before they even walk in. Wrongful convictions are a common consequence of this ineffective justice system with around 1,900 exonerations occurring just in the year of 2016. Moreover, 47 percent of those exonerations were black people (Possley & Stephens, 2017, pp. 7). African American innocents are wrongfully convicted for murder at “seven times the rate [of] whites, who are 64% of the population but comprise only 36% of murder exonerations.” Furthermore, black people were “12 times more likely to be convicted of drug crimes,” and “three-and-a-half times more likely to be innocent than a white sexual assault convict” (Possley & Stephens, 2017, pp. 7). Two young black half-brothers, Henry McCollum, 19, and Leon Brown, 15, were tried and convicted in 1984 for the brutal rape and murder of 11-year-old Sabrina Buie in Robeson County, North Carolina (Possley & Stephens, 2017, pp. 7). The brothers, each intellectually disabled, falsely confessed under the crushing pressure of police interrogation with no actual evidence connecting them to the crime. For twenty-seven years, the pair sat in prison, making numerous appeals to the North Carolina Innocence Inquiry Commission to no avail until 2010 when their case was accepted to be reviewed and investigated. A cigarette butt was found with the DNA of Roscoe Artis, a serial rapist and murderer, exonerating the pair four years later in 2014, thirty-one years after their original conviction. Upon review, it was found that the prosecution hid the fact that each defendant “had not only previously denied knowing anything about the case, but had taken a lie detector test that confirmed his denial” (Possley & Stephens, 2017, pp. 7). Between 2012 and 2017, McCollum and Brown were “two of eight innocent death-row defendants who [had] been exonerated... after spending between 30 and 39 years in prison” (Possley & Stephens, 2017, pp. 8). All eight were black. Most African Americans on trial, innocent or guilty, will face worse outcomes or representation in their trial than white convicts.
The prosecution of Americans seems to be inherently prejudiced and, generally, is “more likely to charge people of color with crimes that carry heavier sentences than whites” (Report to the United, 2018). Federal prosecutors “are twice as likely to charge African Americans with offenses that carry a mandatory minimum sentence than similarly situated whites,” and State prosecutors “are also more likely to charge black rather than similar white defendants under habitual offender laws,” demonstrating the inequality that race dictates the charges that are presented (Report to the United, 2018). Along with taking heavier charges seen for the same crimes, policies are in place that disproportionately affect African Americans, intentionally or unintentionally. For instance, there are drug-free school zone laws in urban neighborhoods where school zones extend into residential areas and thus carry a significantly higher penalty for those who are arrested for drug-related crimes (Report to the United, 2018). In addition to the significant obstacles and opposition that black people face in prosecution and indictment, for the poor or impoverished, public defense is often the only option. The many failures of the public defense system coincide with America’s failures of its African Americans. These attorneys are underfunded, overworked, and, possibly under-qualified, leading to the various aforementioned wrongful convictions and the plight of hard sentencing for black people. Without a strong defense, there is no way to combat the prejudice of the justice system, and an effective counsel is often far too highly-priced for the African American who lacks the privilege of wealth. 
After a sentence has been endured, the convict has the obligation to reenter society but is often stripped of their suffrage and face even greater discrimination in the workforce. In Florida, Kentucky, and Tennessee “more than one in five voting-age African Americans is disenfranchised” (Report to the United, 2018). As a consequence of unnecessary and discriminatory drug laws, African Americans are unreasonably denied their right to vote and thus become under-represented. The Welfare Reform Act of 1996 denies people throughout the country that have been convicted of felony drug offenses to have access to food stamps or cash assistance. The Sentencing Project reports, “Given the... disparate racial effects of the criminal justice system, women and children of color are disproportionately impacted by this exclusionary law” (Report to the United, 2018). America’s criminal justice system excessively focuses its punitive force on African Americans and negatively impacts hundreds of thousands of Americans that it claims to protect through each stage of the process.

America is still a prime host for racism derived specifically from its approach to housing and criminal justice. In recent decades, laws have been created to avoid discrimination, social changes are occurring that are muffling racist ideologies, and programs are in place to reconcile the economic disparities between African-Americans and white people. Though, this does not mean that America is completely void of discrimination. Reforms on the various systems of America are still necessary. Fair housing is in desperate need of reform; Richard Rothstein, a housing policy expert at the Economic Policy Institute, argues that “Because of the long-term effects of racially explicit government housing policies, where for decades blacks were excluded from buying homes in some areas, we need equally explicit government policies to remedy the imbalance” (McMullen, 2019). There needs to be a stronger system of accountability for those in positions of power in criminal justice-related who consistently discriminate against African Americans - this includes but is not limited to police, judges, and prosecutors. The laws requiring the disenfranchisement of felons must be repealed, or at the bare minimum, non-violent offenders should not be punished with the removal of their suffrage. Sentencing reform is a trend that has already begun, but requires even further progression; specifically, mandatory minimum sentences for federal drug offenses must be repealed. The public defender system is in dire need of improvement. Whether that be in the form of stronger incentives to become a public attorney or by some other means, the workload that these attorneys face is gross and arguably, unconstitutional. Much progress has been made since the Civil Rights movement and social and political movements are gradually making America a more accepting nation to black people so the future seems promising for America ending racial imbalance.