Brooks’s review of Prince’s Controversy judges the album by its ability to challenge the boundaries of society and by the breadth and depth of the defiant statements made by each song. Moreland’s review of Taylor Swift’s Midnights, however, judges the album largely by its relationship to Swift herself and also, to a lesser degree, by its relationship to the audience. Many of Moreland’s criticisms center about a song's inability to reflect an authentic feel from Swift within the music. The two critics do find common ground in their criteria as they evaluate both Swift and Prince on the musical resonance of each song either with its message or with the social and/or emotional affect of its words.
Both reviewers cater towards pop audiences, Moreland more so than Brooks. Moreland constantly makes references to contemporary pop phenomena which indicates some assumption that the audience is at least aware of these people and pop eras. Brooks writes about a piece of pop/rock/R&B history so her subject matter naturally caters to the pop fan. Her writing also indicates a preference towards an audience with generally liberal views as many of the points by which she praises Prince are about his ability to upheave traditional conservative values. 
Moreland, ultimately, seems to have been a fan of Swift's latest release, but she acknowledges that there were several songs that she would consider to be misses. She sees this album as another step in the evolution of Taylor Swift, but considers its execution to be at times jarring or disconnected. Moreland presents the album as it relates to Taylor and as it relates to you and therefore she implicitly indicates that the audience should judge it by the affect of its resonance.  Brooks seems to hold Controversy in high regard as she praises every song she mentions, and in the end, she views the album as a massive success in its intended purpose. Brooks presents the piece as an immensely impactful work of art that was ahead of its time and should be considered as a historical masterpiece.
As a reader, I think the reviews will add to my criteria as I listen to these albums. Each review does not stray too far from evaluation towards interpretation, so I think they were both successful in their central purposes. That is, they were both successful in enlightening the successes and failures of each facet of their respective albums. Given the overwhelmingly positive response to Swift's album, Moreland’s seven was initially quite jarring, but I think based on the review, it was adequately justified. The rating functioned to engage me in her writing as I wondered what her criticisms might be that would reduce the score to a seven. I thought Brooks’s nine was largely unnecessary as his article was simply an appreciation of a past work and did not seem to critically evaluate it on its listening merit. The nine was certainly justified in her praise of the work, but again, it seemed quite unnecessary.