This week's readings, in combination, aptly dismantled every aspect of Marxism and even undid some of his criticisms of capitalism. Through many of the readings, I found myself agreeing with people whose broader political philosophies far from align with my own on the merit of their critiques of Marx. For instance, Rand paints a dreary picture of a factory governed by one of Marx’s more utopian ideals that I saw as insightful and quite damning for Marx. She represents the skewed reward systems of “for each according to his ability, to each according to his need” faithfully to my own experience with human nature. Though as Thompson points out, “Metaphysically, [Marxism] seeks to change human nature itself” and Marx might argue that this policy would only be in place once “labor has become not only a mean, of life, but also the highest want in life,” even if extra work were perceived as a reward to the ideal Marxist laborer, there would certainly still be many people who Rand calls the “shiftless and irresponsible” that slip through the cracks of Marx’s moral reconstruction, who would drain the life blood of production for their own personal gain. Moreover, I have seen no evidence that human nature can ever be changed so much as to dissuade unscrupulous actors from seeking the absolute power that Marxism grants the state. These people are represented by the Starnes siblings in Rand’s allegory (perhaps best represented by Ivy Starnes) and referred to at length in Hayek’s essay “Why the Worst Get on Top.”

The connection between socialism and Nazism made by Hayek was novel to me and yet seemed quite natural when it was explained. That being said, by my understanding of socialism and socialist thought, any socialist of any degree (with the exception of the Nazi’s themselves) would likely consider Nazism to be a perversion of the ideals that socialism represents. Beginning with Nazism's separation from the international and focus on nationalism, to the Nazi’s subjugation of a single racial group, and to their desire for violence beyond that of the revolutionary kind.