In Robin D. G. Kelly’s The Proletariat Goes to College, the argument is made that unions, especially those at universities, “need to adopt a broad vision of social justice to succeed” because the labor pool that universities pull from is largely black, brown, recently immigrated, and/or female. Moreover, many of the labor disputes they have fought for are inextricably linked to the ‘isms’ that oppress them. The day after the death of Dr. King, a protest was organized at Duke for increased pay, a grievance committee, and the resignation of the president from an all white country club. Unfortunately, the many marginalized communities that fought for these goals were defeated by the university and their union was left “was in shambles” (Kelly, 39). Furthermore, Yale officials justified “draconian policies toward dining-hall and custodial workers precisely because… [those jobs were] associated with black labor” (Kelly, 40). This is to say that the fight for better working conditions at universities is compounded with many other ongoing fights for dignity in marginalized communities. 
E. P. Thompson’s Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism explores the duality of “exploitation and resistance to exploitation” within capitalism and how it has guided Western culture and values (Thompson, 94). In Amitav Ghosh’s A Lamp Falls, when exploitation far outweighs its resistance, capitalism destroys the less-powerful force. These ideas speak to the culturally destructive force of great powers in their need to establish a cultural continuity as capitalism seeks to reach homogeneity for the sake of trade. 
Typically, I am amenable to the thought that capitalism can be a force for social mobility amongst countries, but Thompson’s essay brings up a strong base of evidence that the kind of social mobility capitalism offers to developing countries may not be worth the trouble. As England was ‘developing’ in the industrial revolution, they relied on authoritarian and exploitative structures to establish themselves as an economic power. If that is the requirement for growth, I may not be so amenable to capitalism as I thought.

In Robin Kelly’s The Proletariat Goes to College, Kelly argues that unions, especially at universities, “need to adopt a broad vision of social justice to succeed” because they consist of many marginalized communities. The labor disputes these people have fought for are often inextricably linked to the ‘isms’ that oppress them. After the death of Dr. King, a protest was organized at Duke for increased pay and the president’s resignation from an all-white country club. Ultimately, the workers were defeated and their union left “in shambles” (Kelly, 39). Often “draconian policies” could be employed because these unions’ work was “associated with black labor” (Kelly, 40). 
E. Thompson’s Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism explores how the duality of “exploitation and resistance to exploitation” within capitalism guides Western culture (Thompson, 94). In Amitav Ghosh’s A Lamp Falls, when exploitation outweighs its resistance, capitalism destroys the less-powerful force. These ideas speak to the culturally destructive force of great powers in their need to establish a cultural continuity as capitalism seeks to reach homogeneity. 
Typically, I’m amenable to the thought that capitalism is a force for economic mobility amongst countries, but Thompson’s essay brings up a strong base of evidence that the kind of mobility capitalism offers developing countries may not be worth the struggle. As England was ‘developing’ in the industrial revolution, they relied on authoritarian and exploitative structures to advance as an economic power. If that is the requirement for growth, I may not be so amenable to capitalism as I thought.