Paragraph 1: Determine and then accurately summarize/synthesize and substantiate with some evidence ONE key argument (or, for fiction, an analytical theme) from the assigned texts of the week. An argument answers a how or why question. 50%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses). 


Paragraph 2: Put one idea raised in these texts into “conversation” with an idea raised in a previous course reading or film. Take care in determining which texts make sense to connect. Make a case for why it is important to think about the two texts/ideas in relation to one another, going beyond a simple “this idea resembles that idea.” 25%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses). 


Paragraph 3: Analyze how one aspect of the reading(s) significantly challenges or otherwise complicates the way you think about a particular issue or topic. Be as specific as possible. 25%, graded on A, B, C, D, F scale (no minus or pluses).




Thrasher argues that settler colonial structures dating back to the forceful immigration of slaves to America have, throughout history, enforced and relied on the sickness of black populations in order to maintain the health of the white population (Thrasher, 30). For example in the COVID-19 pandemic, disproportionately black and brown essential workers were exposed to the virus while disproportionately white populations were able to keep the virus at a socially distant length (Thresher, 31).
As the Critical Polyamorist explores how America’s puritan traditions and antiquated ideas of morality have molded systems to dissuade alternative lifestyles, Thrasher finds that these structures are often exacerbated, if not created, by the neoliberal capitalist tendency to deliver power to the ruling class at the expense of the oppressed and to marginalize minority groups as a means of distracting from this concentration of power (Thrasher, 111). 
I recently heard a comedian question why white people invaded so many countries for their spices, only to avoid spices in their own food. I identified with this question, especially considering I have white English grandparents who often make bland, spiceless food. Ghosh suggests that there was a shift in the taste of upper class Europeans away from spices as they became associated with a poor moral fiber (Ghosh, 73).