As I understand it, I think of my memory as similar to a data structure called a hashmap. That is, when accessing memories, they cannot simply be indexed from 0 (my earliest memory), but I need to have a key that points to a reference that stores that memory. In many cases, that key is sensual. For example, the smell of cigarettes might allow me to more vividly remember when my family and I bought our dog since the breeder’s house was stained with the scent. Despite this fact, the memory that my mind associates with the key “my first memory” is of a young, likely three or four year-old, me, having just gotten up from watching Dora and walking towards the door of my family’s first house after being called by my mom. Much of this memory is visual and reasoned since the key I have is a linguistic one, but I do remember a feeling of excitement as it may have been the first time I got to see my mom that day.
I can hardly ever remember my dreams unless I quickly make an effort to retain them after waking up. Writing or dictating my dreams immediately after waking up often allows me to remember more of the dream than I otherwise would have. When I do this, I can usually work backwards from where the dream ends by analyzing what got me to that point. This technique comes with the caveat that whatever series of events that I string together will be a low fidelity representation of the dream. The only time I truly remember my dreams is within the dream itself or within subsequent dreams that may take place as a continuation of that previous dream.
I have what I would consider to be a rational fear of the dark because of its ability to obscure and conceal potential dangers. I find that I am often drawn to paintings that evoke this fear, namely Francisco de Goya’s Pinturas Negras (Black Paintings). Fear heightens the senses. It makes us more keenly aware of the details in a painting, or in the case of darker paintings, it makes us project detail that is obscured. Fear is a flow state and like any other it inspires creativity. But creativity born from fear often tends toward the negative which I think appeals to me as much of my creative thought on the day-to-day is born from optimism and therefore my mind yearns for a balance.