As someone who is generally optimistic about capitalism, I am inclined to believe that capitalism and the environment are not fundamentally opposed to each other. However, it is hard to ignore the impact that humans have had on the climate simply by virtue of the energy and resources required to fuel innovation and increasing standards of living and arguments such as Schwartz’s and Foster’s seem to establish an inherent conflict between natural interests and human interests. From a simply human-centric perspective, Epstein and Shellenberger make convincing arguments that we will be able to withstand and adapt to changes in the environment as they come, whether they are caused by us or otherwise. However, human life is not my only concern as it relates to the environment. I think, contrary to some of the readings, that maintaining the beauty of the natural world is equally as important as maintaining and improving human life. While I do agree with Epstien’s assertion that we will find better, cleaner, and cheaper ways to fuel our economic growth, I must also admit that we, as a species, have wrought much ecological damage already seeking that ever present goal and because of this fact I believe that there should be bounds in place to restrain the negative externalities of capitalist fervor. Calls to violently overthrow capitalism so as to mitigate its environmental harm seem, to me, short sighted at best and self-contradictory at worst. As Schwartz asserts in his article, “Man survives only by altering nature to satisfy his own needs.” I don’t believe this will change simply by virtue of a new economic system. A communist government would chop down the Amazon rainforest for more collectivized cattle farms as easily as a capitalist economy would chop it down for private ones. Moreover, revolutionary socialists like Street seem to ignore the potential for massive environmental damage that a violent revolution may incur despite many criticisms of the environmental harm done by imperialist wars. Ultimately, I reject the idea that an inclination towards capitalism and a desire to maintain the earth's ecology are fundamentally at odds as capitalism has the potential for infinite recursive improvements upon itself that leave open the possibility for more sustainable and more efficient energy, resource attainment, and agricultural practices. Before those changes revolutionize our world, however, I think it necessary to ensure that our most valuable ecosystems are protected and, unfortunately, the only entities with the resources to ensure that protection are governments.